--- PAGE 1 ---
DER ROOB

--- PAGE 2 ---
I #f j' f V‘.'. {!.% Vi ■%.. npifllligHt * , 
j. 1 jV, f «*\\A ^ f s J;MMBaMai \ ' ' \ V>\ ’ . 
if \?,I A'VistA^i /Slk, , ];/ a \ i \ 4% ik • SHDI 
■■ 
j i y il fvl 
THE HERMETIC MUSEUM: 
ALCHEMY 
& 
MYSTICISM 
ALEXANDER ROOB 
TASCHEN 
KÖLN LONDON MADRID NEW YORK PARIS TOKYO

--- PAGE 3 ---
Illustrations: Cover: Miniature painting by 
Jehan Perreal, 1516 (p. 504); Back Cover: 
Donum Dei, I7th Century (p. 443); p. 2, 
from: William Blake: Jerusalem, 
1804-1820; p. 6, from: Michael Maier; 
Viatorium, Oppenheim, 1618; p. 34,122, 
612, from: J. Typotius: Symbola 
divina ethumana, Prague, 1601-1603; 
p. 532, from: Basilius Valentius: 
Chymische Schriften, Leipzig, 176g 
©2001 TASCHEN GmbH, 
Hohenzollernring 53, D-50672 Köln 
www.taschen.com 
© igg6 VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn, forthe 
illustrations of Joseph Beuys, Marcel 
Duchamp and Yves Klein 
Cover design: Angelika Taschen, Cologne; 
Mark Thomson, London 
English translation: Shaun Whiteside, London 
Printed in Italy 
ISBN 3-8228-1514-4 
Contents 
8 Introduction 
34 Macrocosm 
The world Ptolemy, Brahe, Copernicus ■ Sun • Moon • 
Cosmic time • Lower astronomy ■ Stars • Music of 
the spheres • Genesis ■ Eye • Cosmic egg 
122 Opusmagnum 
Genesis in the retort Elementa chemicae - 
Purification • Fall of Adam • Chaos • Saturnine night • 
Torment of the metals • Resurrection • Aurora • 
Light & Darkness Jacob Böhme's System - Ladder 
Ramon Lull's System • Philosophical tree ■ Sephiroth • 
Ab uno • Fortress • Animal riddles ■ Oedipus chimi- 
cus • Dew Mute book • Women's work & child's play • 
Vegetable Chemistry • Serpent • Return Theosophical 
Society • Conjunctio Rosarium philosophorum • 
Androgyny • Separatio • Hermetic Yantras • Trinity • 
Fire • Philosophical egg • Matrix • Fountain - Christ- 
Lapis • Blood 
534 Microcosm 
Human Form Divine • Brain & memory • Signatures • 
Script & seal • Apparitions 
614 Rotation 
Whirl & magnet • Divine Geometry • Wheel Winds, 
Gurdjieff's eneagramm, Colour wheel • Rose • Pilgrim 
704 Index

--- PAGE 4 ---
Introduction 
"It will be apparent that it is difficult 
to discern which properties each thing 
possesses in reality." 
(Democritus, 8th Century B.C.)

--- PAGE 5 ---
Introduction 
The hermetic museum 
Introduction 
8 
A rieh world of images has etched itself into the memory of mod¬ 
ern man, despite the fact that it is not available in public collec- 
tions, but lies hidden in old manuscripts and prints. 
These are the eternal "halls of Los", the prophet of the imag- 
ination, which are filled with the exemplary images and Platonic 
figures that govern our understanding of the world and ourselves, 
and of which the poet William Blake (1757-1827) wrote that "all 
things acted on earth are seen in them", and that "every age 
renews its powers from these works". (Jerusalem, 1804-1820) 
Puzzle pictures & linguistic riddles 
By imbuing them with a special hieroglyphic aura, the creators of 
these pictures sought to suggest the very great age of their art 
and to acknowledge the source of their wisdom: the patriarch of 
natural mysticism and alchemy, Hermes Trismegistus. 
It was Greek colonists in late classical Egypt who identified 
their healing, winged messenger of the gods, Hermes (Lat. Mer- 
curius) with the ancient Egyptian Thoth, the Thrice Greatest'. 
Thoth was the god of writing and magic, worshipped, like Hermes, 
as the "psychopompos", the souls' guide through the underworld. 
The mythical figure of Hermes Trismegistus was also linked to a 
legendary pharaoh who was supposed to have taught the Egyp- 
tians all their knowledge of natural and supernatural things, in- 
cluding their knowledge of hieroglyphic script. The alchemists saw 
him as their "Moses" who had handed down the divine command- 
ments of their art in the "emerald tablet". This "Tabula Smarag- 
dina", now believed to date back to the 6th-8th centuries A.D., 
became known to the Christian world after the fourteenth Century 
through translations from the Arabic. 
There was hardly a single alchemist in eitherthe laboratory 
or the speculative, mystical camp who was not prepared to bring 
his discoveries into line with the solemn and verbatim message of 
these twelve theses: 
"True, true. Without doubt. Certain: / The below is as the 
above, and the above as the below, to perfect the wonders of the 
- 
The Emerald 
Tablet, the central 
monument tothe 
hermetic imagin- 
ation. 
Heinrich Khunrath, 
Amphitheatrum 
sapientiae aeter- 
nae, Hanover, 1606 
One. / And as all things came from the One, from the meditation 
of the One, so all things are born from this One by adaptation. / Its 
father is the Sun, its mother the Moon; the Wind carries it in its 
bei ly; its nurse is the Earth. / It is the father of all the wonders of 
the whole world. Its power is perfect when it is transformed into 
Earth. / Separate the Earth from Fi re and the subtle from the 
gross, cautiously and judiciously. / It ascends from Earth to 
Heaven and then returns back to the Earth, so that it receives the 
power of the upper and the lower. Thus you will possess the 
brightness of the whole world, and all darkness will flee you. /This 
is the force of all forces, for it overcomes all that is subtle and 
penetrates solid things. / Thus was the world created. / From this 
wonderful adaptations are effected, and the means are given 
here. / And Hermes Trismegistus is my name, because I possess the 
three parts of the wisdom of the whole world." 
Also from Hermes, messenger of the gods, comes hermeneu- 
tics, the art of textual Interpretation, and according to the author 
of the Buch der Heiligen Dreifaltigkeit (Book of the Holy Trinity, 
1415), the first alchemical text in the German language, this occurs 
Introduction 
Introduction 
9

--- PAGE 6 ---
Introduction 
Introduction 
"The wind bears it 
in its belly." 
The birth of the 
philosophers' 
stone occurs in the 
air. 
M. Maier, 
Atalanta fugiens, 
Oppenheim, 1618 
/Mi 
"Its nurse isthe 
Earth." 
Mercurial water 
nourishes it. 
M. Maier, 
Atalanta fugiens, 
Oppenheim, 1618 
in four directions: in the natural, supernatural, divine and human 
sense. As used by its most distinguished representatives, alchemi- 
cal literature possesses a suggestive language, rieh in allegories, 
homophony and word-play which, often through the mediation of 
Jacob Böhme's theosophical works, has had a profound effect on 
the poetry of Romanticism (Blake, Novalis), the philosophy of 
German idealism (Hegel, Schelling) and on modern literature 
(Yeats, Joyce, Rimbaud, Breton, Artaud). 
Many voices, even from within their own ranks, were raised 
against the "obscure idioms" of the alchemists. And their own 
account of their communication technique hardly sounds more 
encouraging: "Wherever we have spoken openly we have (actu- 
ally) said nothing. But where we have written something in code 
and in pictures we have concealed the truth." (Rosarium philoso- 
phorum, Weinheim edition, 1990) 
Anyone who inadvertently enters this linguistic arena will 
suddenly find himself in a chaotic System of references, a network 
of constantly changing code-names and Symbols for arcane sub- 
stances, in which everything can always apparently mean every- 
thing eise, and in which even specialist, Baroque dictionaries and 
modern lists of Synonyms provide few clues. This kind of profusion 
of diffuse concepts always required simplifying measures. These 
might be said to include the influential attempts at interpretation 
by the Swiss psychoanalyst C.G. Jung (1875-1961), who was solely 
interested in the internal nature of the hybrid form of alchemy 
and only acknowledged its external, Chemical workings as the 
scientific projection of psychological developments. 
But the hermetic philosophers can be heard "more freely, 
distinctly or clearly" "with a silent speech or without Speech in the 
illustrations of the mysteries, both in the riddles presented with 
figures and in the words". (C. Horlacher, Kern und Stern..., Frank¬ 
furt, 1707). With their thought-pictures they attempted, according 
to a motto of the Rosicrucian Michael Maier, "to reach the intellect 
via the senses" To this extent, their highly cryptic, pictorial world 
can be placed under the heading of one of its favourite motifs, the 
hermaphrodite, as a cross between sensual Stimulus (Aphrodite) 
and intellectual appeal (Hermes). It is aimed at man's intuitive 
insight into the essential Connections, not at his discursive ability. 
10 
Introduction 
Introduction 
n

--- PAGE 7 ---
Introduction 
Introduction 
which is largely held to be a destructive force. "That which lives on 
reason lives against the spirit", wrote Paracelsus. Along with him, 
many lived in expectation of the "Third Empire of the Holy Spirit" 
prophesied by Joachim of Fiore (1130-1202), in which visionary 
insight would replace literal, textual understanding. The primal 
language of paradise, which names all things according to their 
true essence, would then be revealed again, and all the mysteries 
of nature would be presented as an open book. 
The tendency towards arcane language in "obscure speeches", 
in numbers and in enigmatic pictures, is explained by a profound 
scepticism about the expressive possibilities of literal language, 
subjected to Babylonian corruption, which holds the Holy Spirit 
fettered in its grammatical bonds. The prehistoric knowledge, the 
prisca sapientia that was revealed directly to Adam and Moses by 
God, and which was handed down in a long, elite chain of tradi- 
tion, had to be preserved in such a way that it was protected 
against the abuse of the profane. To this end, Hermes Trismegis- 
tus, who, like Zoroaster, Pythagoras and Plato, was seen as a major 
link in this hermetic chain, developed hieroglyphs. The Renais¬ 
sance idea of Egyptian hieroglyphs took them to be a symbolic, 
rebus-like, esoteric script. This was influenced by the treatise of a 
5th Century Egyptian by the name of Horapolio, in which he pro- 
vided a symbolic key to some 200 signs. This work, entitled 'Hiero- 
glyphica', which was published in many translations and illustrated 
by Albrecht Dürer, among others, prompted the artists of the 
Renaissance, including Bellini, Giorgione, Titian and Bosch, to 
develop the language of signs in their own imaginative way. 
Horapollo's 'Hieroglyphica' also formed the basis forthe 
development, in the mid-i6th Century, of emblems, Symbols which 
Copy of Dürer's 
illustrationsto 
Horapolio 
1 "Hour-watching" 
2 Impossible 
3 Heart (Ibis) 
12 
Hermes-Mercury, 
god oftrade and 
communication, 
urges silence. 
Mercurial elo- 
quence refers to 
the phenomenal 
periphery, the 
revealed world of 
appearances. The 
experience of the 
effects of the spir¬ 
itual centre (Unit 
or Monas) is in- 
accessibleto the 
expressive possi¬ 
bilities of lan¬ 
guage. 
In the cosmic vi- 
sions of Giordano 
Bruno (1548-1600) 
the monads, the 
divine nuclei of all 
living creatures, 
correspond to the 
gravitational cen- 
tres of the stars. 
Achilles Bocchius, 
Symbolicarum 
quaestionum..., 
Bologna, 1555 
Introduction 
13 
Introduction

--- PAGE 8 ---
Introduction 
are always connected with a short motto and generally accompa- 
nied by an explanatory commentary. They were very populär in the 
Baroque, and proved to be an ideal vehicle forthe communication 
of paradoxical alchemical teaching aids and maxims. Pseudo-hiero- 
glyphs were thus connected with pseudo-ancient Egyptian wis- 
doms, since the majority of the hermetic scripts that tended to 
be found in attics or the niches of old walls proved to be pseudo- 
epigraphs masquerading as works by eminent figures in the her¬ 
metic tradition. 
Emphasizing their broad theoretical foundations, the 
alchemists often termed themselves "philosophers", describing 
their work simply as "art" (ars) or "philosophical art". Although 
the alchemical concept of art is derived from Aristotle's techne, 
and refers very generally to skill in both theoretical and practical 
matters, its similarity to the extended concepts of art in the 
modern age is unmistakable. It is not, as one might immediately 
assume, the illustrative and fantastic spheres of the traditional 
visual arts, in which the links to the hermetic Opus Magnum, the 
'Great Work' of the alchemists, are revealed, but rather those 
areas that involve the aspect of process in the experience of reality, 
such as Conceptual Art and Fluxus. 
The heyday of hermetic emblems and the art of illustration 
coincided with the decline in "classical" alchemy, which was still 
capable of combining technical skills and practical experience with 
spiritual components. Theosophical alchemists like the Rosicru- 
cians and practising laboratory chemists like Andreas Libavius, 
who sought to improve the empirical foundations of alchemy and 
thereby brought it closerto analytical chemistry, were already 
irreconcilable by the beginning of the i7th Century. Although Rosi- 
crucians did boast that "godless and accursed gold-making" was 
easy for them, this was a ludicrous and marginal pursuit in com- 
parison with the main pursuit of inner purification: their gold was 
the spiritual gold of the theologians. 
But these two divergent trends could lay Claim to the same 
founding father, Theophrastus Bombastus von Hohenheim, also 
known as Paracelsus (1493-1541)- In his work, the empirical study 
of nature takes place against a visionary and mystical background. 
His prodigious body of work contains both numerous instructions 
for the manufacture of pharmaceutical preparations on a vege- 
table and metallic basis and a practically inexhaustible wealth of 
natural mystical concepts in the spheres of astral magic, the 
Cabala and Christian mysticism. Dressing these up in highly indi¬ 
vidual "bombastic" linguistic Creations did nothing to reduce their 
wide dissemination. These writings would exert an influence for 
centuries, extending from the speculative interpreters of alchemy, 
from Valentin Weigel, the Rosicrucians and Jacob Böhme, to the 
Romantics and modern branches of anthroposophy and theoso- 
phy. 
With their two playful manifestos, in which they promised 
more gold "than the king of Spain brings back from the two In- 
dias", a group of Protestant theology students had given a power- 
ful boost to the production of alchemical writings at the beginning 
of the I7th Century. Even in the i8th Century this kind of printed 
matter, dealing with the search for the tapis, the Philosophers' 
Stone, were seen in such numbers at German book fairs "that one 
could make the road from Frankfurt to Leipzig lovely and soft and 
even with them". (J.G. Volckamer the Younger, Adeptus Fatalis, 
Freiburg, 1721; quoted in: J. Telle, "Bemerkungen zum 'Rosarium 
philosophorum'", in: Rosarium philosophorum, Weinheim igg2) 
One of the many sympathizers with the invisible Lutheran 
fraternity was Lucas Jennis, the publisher of the first 'Musaeum 
Hermeticum', published in Frankfurt in 1625. Although the number 
of illustrations in this collection of treatises hardly does justice 
to its title, it does contain a number of excellent engravings by 
Matthäus Merian (1593-1650). A year previously, under the title of 
Viridarium Chymicum or Chymisches Lustgärtlein (Chymical Garden 
of Delights), Jennis had published a collection of alchemical illus¬ 
trations taken from books published by his Company. The indi¬ 
vidual illustrations are accompanied by rather unenlightening 
lines from the pen of Daniel Stolcius von Stolcenberg, a pupil of 
the Paracelsian physician Michael Maier (1568-1622). Maier had 
been physician to Emperor Rudolf II, known as the 'German Her¬ 
mes', whose Prague court was home to the most famous esoteric 
scientists of the day. In 1618 Maier published his famous collection 
of emblems 'Atalanta fugiens' with the Oppenheim publisher 
Theodor de Bry. To Merian's marriage to de Bry's daughter we owe 
Introduction 
14 
Introduction 
Introduction 
15

--- PAGE 9 ---
Introduction 
The Kircher 
Museum inthe 
Collegium 
Romanum 
A. Kircher, Turris 
Babel, Amsterdam, 
1679 
'•UCGllKPj; 
W Jc£*' 
V,:-; /5SS 
16 
Introduction 
not only the illustrations to the 'Atalanta' but also many of the en- Introduction 
gravings for the gigantic book-publishing enterprise of Maier's 
English friend and colleague Robert Fludd (1574-1637), the 
Utriusque Cosmi (...) Historia (The History of the Two Worlds) in 
several volumes. 
Identifying his intellectual background with some exactitude, 
detractors called Fludd Trismegistian-Platonick-Rosy-crucian 
Doctor. His actual achievements in the field of natural Science may 
not have been of any great significance, but the vivid expression 
which he gave to many Contemporary impulses are important for 
an understanding of Elizabethan culture, particularly the dramas 
of Shakespeare. Fludd deserves a Status within cultural history 
which has hitherto been withheld from him. (I am grateful to 
Dietrich von Donat for informing me that Fludd gave the de Bry 
printing works very detailed drawings on which to base their 
engravings.) 
In the next generation, however, Fludd found a competitor in 
the Counter-Reformation camp, in the Jesuit Athanasius Kircher 
(1602-1680), who would far exceed the former's encyclopaedic 
achievement in almost every area. The universal scholar Kircher is 
seen above all as the founder of Egyptology, and until Champol- 
lion's triumph his symbolic deciphering of hieroglyphs was unchal- 
lenged. 
His extensive work, which included - alongside his many richly 
illustrated volumes - his famous scientific collection (kept at the 
'Museum Kircherianum' in the Collegium Romanum in Rome until 
1876), is permeated by his scientific knowledge, esoteric interests 
and evidence of a pronounced belief in miracles. In this, and also in 
his early attention to oriental and Asiatic Systems of religion, he 
prepared the ground for the adventurous syncretism of the Theo- 
sophical Society at the end of the igth Century. 
Gnosis and Neoplatonism 
For the art historian Aby Warburg (i866-ig2g), who did pioneering 
interdisciplinary work in the early years of this Century, late classi- 
cal Alexandria represented the epitome of the dark, superstitious 
side of man. Here, in the first Century A.D., in the former centre 
of Greek culture on Egyptian soil, with its highly diverse mixture of 
Introduction 
17