th Century. 
Gnosis and Neoplatonism 
For the art historian Aby Warburg (i866-ig2g), who did pioneering 
interdisciplinary work in the early years of this Century, late classi- 
cal Alexandria represented the epitome of the dark, superstitious 
side of man. Here, in the first Century A.D., in the former centre 
of Greek culture on Egyptian soil, with its highly diverse mixture of 
Introduction 
17

--- PAGE 10 ---
Introduction 
peoples, Greek and Roman colonists, Egyptians and Jews, the 
threads of all the individual disciplines making up the complex of 
hermetic philosophy came together: alchemy, astral magic and the 
Cabala. The complementary syncretic Systems that nourished 
them, hybrids of Hellenic philosophies and oriental religions and 
mystery cults, are known by the two concepts of Gnosis and 
Neoplatonism. Both are fundamentally animistic, filled with many 
demonic and angelic creatures, whose power and influence deter- 
mine human fate. 
Gnosis means knowledge, and the Gnostics acquired this in a 
number of ways. The first and most fundamental form of know- 
ledge is good news, and concerns the divine nature of one's own 
essence: the soul appears as a divine spark of light. The second 
is bad news and concerns the "terror of the Situation": the spark 
of light is subject to the influence of external dark forces, in the 
exile of matter. Imprisoned within the coarse dungeon of the 
body# it is betrayed by the external senses; the demonic stars sully 
and bewitch the divine essence of one's nature in order to prevent 
a return to the divine home. 
Underthe Stimulus of Zoroastrian and Platonic dualism, a 
painful gulf opened up between the interior and the external, 
between subjective and objective experience, between spirit and 
matter. It was cosmologically established by Aristotle (384-322 
B.C.) in the 4th Century B.C., with a strict division of the universe 
into the eternal, ethereal heaven and the transient sublunary 
sphere. This model, only slightly modified by the Alexandrian 
Gnostic Claudio Ptolemy (c. A.D. 100-178), suppressed all efforts 
at a unified explanation of the world for two millennia. 
In Gnosis, pleroma, the spiritual plenitude of the divine world 
of light Stands immediately opposite kenoma, the material void of 
the earthly world of phenomena. The ungrateful task of creation 
falls to a creator god who works against the good god of light or 
"unknown father", and who often bears the despotic traits of the 
Old Testament Jehovah. He is the demiurge, a word which simply 
means artist or craftsman. 
While in Plato's world creation myth, "Timaeus", the demi¬ 
urge, also called "the poet", forms a well-proportioned cosmos 
out of the primal world, in the form of an organism with a soul. 
18 
Introduction 
which "contains all mortal and immortal things", the Gnostic Introduction 
demiurge produces a terrible chaos, a corrupt and imperfect 
creation which, in the belief of the alchemists, must be improved 
and completed through their "art" with a new Organization or 
reorganization. 
In many Gnostic myths man is given an autonomous task of 
creation: in order to heal the sick organism of the world, he must 
lead the divine sparks of light, spiritual gold, through the seven 
planetary spheres of the Ptolemaic cosmos and back to their heav- 
enly home. To the outermost sphere of Saturn corresponds the 
"sullied garment of the soul", the grossest material, lead. Passing 
through this sphere meant physical death and the putrefaction of 
matter that is a necessary prerequisite transformation. The sub- 
sequent stages were: Jupiter-tin, Mars-iron, Venus-copper, Mer- 
cury-quicksilver, Moon-silver and Sun-gold. 
The individual metals were taken to represent various degrees 
of maturity or illness of the same basic material on its way to per- 
fection, to gold. To ease its passage through the seven gates of 
the planetary demons, gnosis, the knowledge of astral magic prac- 
tices, was required. 
The Neoplatonists took the various diverging concepts that 
their master had put forward dialectically in his dialogues and 
poured them into the tight corset of tiered, pyramid-shaped world 
Orders. Like a descending scale of creation, the universe overflows 
from the uppermost One, the good, its intervals following the har- 
monic laws linked with the name of the philosopher Pythagoras 
(6th Century B.C.) and his doctrine of the music of the spheres. The 
inner discord of the Gnostics was unknown to them. Between the 
two poles of Plato's philosophy, the static and immortal world 
of the celestial forms and the moving and transient world of their 
likenesses on earth, they inserted a series of mediating author- 
ities. 
Corresponding to the tripartite division of the small world of 
man (microcosm) into body, soul and spirit was a cosmic soul which 
dwelled in the realm of the stars. This cosmic soul reflected the 
ideas of the higher, transcendental sphere of the divine intellect, 
and through the influence of the stars these ideas imprinted their 
eternal "symbols" on the lower, physical transient sphere. 
Introduction 
19

--- PAGE 11 ---
Introduction 
Man thereby has the possibility of manipulating events in the 
earthly sphere, using magical practices such as the manufacture of 
talismans, spells and other such things to affect this middle sphere 
of the cosmic soul. Contact is established through the fine mater¬ 
ial of the "sidereal" or "astral body" that invisibly surrounds man. 
Before the Fall, according to the Gnostic-Cabalistic myths, the 
whole of heaven was a single human being offine material, the 
giant, androgynous, primordial Adam, who is now in every human 
being, in the shrunken form of this invisible body, and who is wait- 
ing to be brought back to heaven. Man can communicate with the 
macrocosm through this sidereal medium, and thus receives pre- 
monitions and prophecies in dreams. 
The equivalent in man of the demiurgic, world-creating urge 
of the outer stars is the Creative capacity of the imagination, which 
Paracelsus calls "the inner star". Imagination is not to be confused 
with fantasy. The former is seen as a solar, structuring force aimed 
at the eida, the paradigmatic forms in the "real world", the latter 
as a lunatic delusion related to the eidola, the shadowy likenesses 
of the "apparent world". 
"If someone really possessed these inner ideas of which Plato 
speaks, then he could draw his whole life from them and create 
artwork after artwork without ever reaching an end." (Albrecht 
Dürer) 
Paracelsus likens the imagination to a magnet which, with its 
power of attraction, draws the things of the external world within 
man, to reshape them there. Its activity is thus captured in the 
image of the inner alchemist, the sculptor or the blacksmith. It is 
crucial to master them, for what man thinks "is what he is, and a 
thing is as he thinks it. If he thinks a fire, he is a fire". (Paracelsus) 
For the Greek natural philosopher Democritus (470-c. 380 
B.C.), who originated the idea of the microcosm, all images, 
whether of phenomena, ideas or thoughts, are concretely material 
things whose qualities can impress themselves upon the viewer; 
even the soul, according to him, consists of subtle, fiery atoms. 
Most streams of thought in mysticism oscillate between the fun¬ 
damental dualism of spirit and matter and a form of monism 
derived from Democritus. Thus, for the Neoplatonists, the visible 
and tangible sphere represents only the gross residue of a long 
20 
Introduction 
sequence of increasingly subtle degrees of matter. We come across Introduction 
this materialism once again in the modern spiritualist and occult 
movements, whose important representative, the Swedish vision- 
ary Emanuel Swedenborg (1688-1772), went in search of the mate- 
riality of the soul and the life-spirits in his early scientific phase. 
In the Middle Ages Neoplatonism chiefly found its way into 
the mysticism of the Eastern Church. Although it was by no means 
incompatible with the rigidly hierarchical structures of the me- 
dieval state and Church, in the West it led a shadowy existence on 
the edge of the great scholastic System of theories. The Church 
believed it had finally put a stop to the attempted invasion of 
gnostic "heresies" in the sense of a self-determining and liberal 
consciousness of salvation, in its destruction of the heresies of the 
Cathars and Waldensians at the beginning of the i3th Century, and 
in the subsequent establishment of the "Holy Inquisition". 
fi 
-cd! 
r* t n 
^ T 
1 
> 
7 
y* \ 
IJ y 
Leonardo da Vinci 
(1452-1519) was 
familiär with the 
ideas of Florentine 
Neoplatonism, 
particularly 
the Corpus 
Hermeticum in 
Marsilio Ficino's 
translation. 
Study ofpropor- 
tions after Vitruvius 
Introduction 
21

--- PAGE 12 ---
Introduction But in the Renaissance the flow of Alexandrian tradition 
forged powerfully ahead: in 1463 Marsilio Ficino (1433-1499), the 
central figure in the Florentine Platonic Academy, was commis- 
sioned by Cosimo de Medici to translate a collection of fourteen 
Gnostic and Neoplatonist treatises from the early Christian 
period. Also attributed to the "Thrice Greatest Hermes", this col¬ 
lection was well-known under the title Corpus Hermeticum. These 
texts made a profound impression on the humanist intellectual 
world, for although they were ostensibly ancient, pagan writings 
permeated with various concepts of magic, they still seemed to be 
written entirely in the tone of the New Testament, and to be im- 
bued with the Christian spirit. Moreover, the idea of ancient Jew- 
ish teachings that reached all the way back to Moses - the Cabala 
- as conveyed by Picino's friend. Pico della Mirandola (1463-1494) 
reinforced the suspicion of a prisca sapientia in the Christian spirit. 
(In fact the Cabala, in its familiär form, was only developed out 
of its Alexandrian foundations in Spain and Southern France in the 
i2th and i3th centuries.) 
The effects of Gnostic consciousness on European intellectual 
life are so comprehensive and omnipresent that their extent is 
hard to assess: the man of the Corpus Hermeticum, blessed with 
divine Creative powers, merges with the image of the Renaissance 
man, who has begun to free himself from the bonds of the tiered, 
medieval cosmos and thereby moves towards the centre of the 
universe. 
The Gnostic spark of light, which strives for divine knowledge 
out of the darkness of the world, is reflected in the individual 
Protestant soul's struggle for salvation. Over the centuries, 
Lutheran orthodoxy managed to erase from its own ranks almost 
all memories of natural mystical reform movements deriving from 
alchemy and the Cabala, since they opposed "walled Christianity 
and literal faith" from the first. 
William Blake rightly described the deistic God of the 
progress-loving Enlightenment, who abandons the machinery of 
creation once he has set it in motion, leaving it to continue blindly 
on its course, as a Gnostic demiurge. And the broad path of mod¬ 
ern Science was only able to open up on the basis of the motif of an 
imperfect creation in need of improvement. Interestingly, it was 
22 
Introduction 
Introduction 
also Gnostic thinkers such as Paracelsus and Böhme who drew the 
picture of the dark matter of enchanted, divine, nature, and thus 
stimulated the later Romantic worship of nature. 
Only a few alchemists were familiär with the Corpus Her¬ 
meticum. Forthem all, however, Hermes was associated with the 
figure who had brought them the Emerald Tablet, and with the 
moist, "mercurial" principle which they called the "beginning and 
end of the Work". The veneration of this "divine water" reached 
back to the upper, pneumatic waters of Gnosis which, in Greek 
writings from the early years of alchemy, in reference to the descent 
of the Gnostic Christ, flowed down into the darkness of matter to 
awaken the dead bodies of their metals from their slumber. 
These writings also deal with the rites of the dismemberment 
and resurrection of metals which recall the Egyptian myth of 
Osiris, as well as the Orphic and Dionysian cults, which are kept 
alive to this day in the rites of Freemasonry. The scholar of com- 
parative religions, Mircea Eliade, refers to the idea of the "en- 
twined and dramatic life of matter" that derives from the ancient, 
metallurgical practices of the Egyptian and Mesopotamian cul- 
tures, whose inner development and form in visionary images 
were only possible "through the knowledge of the Greek-Oriental 
mysteries". (Schmiede und Alchemisten [Smiths and Alchemists] 
Stuttgart, 1980) 
There was no strict division between the organic and inorganic 
study of matter, and thus the process of transmutation was im- 
agined as a kind of fermentation, in which certain metals were 
able to transfer their properties like an enzyme or a yeast. 
However, alchemy, as it reached Christian Europe via Spain in 
the i2th and i3th centuries, is much richer and more mysterious 
than the mystical writings of the early Alexandrian alchemists 
would suggest. To do justice to the "Royal Art", we might use the 
tripartite Separation much loved by the Hermetics: according to 
which the part corresponding to the soul was to be found in Egyp¬ 
tian Alexandria. But it owes its corpus, its great wealth of practical 
experiences, of technical knowledge, code names, maxims and 
allegorical images, to its development by the Arabs. And its spirit, 
finally, lies within the natural philosophy of ancient Greece, where 
its theoretical foundations were laid in the 5th Century B.C. 
Introduction 
23

--- PAGE 13 ---
Introduction 
The divine 
mercurial water. 
Baro Urbigerus, 
Besondere 
Chymische 
Schriften, 
Hamburg, 1705 
Concepts of natural philosophy Introduction 
It is said of the philosopher and thaumaturge Empedocles that he 
claimed the existence of two suns. The hermetic doctrines also 
mclude a double sun, and distinguish between a bright spirit-sun, 
the philosophical goldt and the dark natural sun, corresponding to 
material gold. The former consists of the essential fire that is con- 
joined with the ether or the 'glowing air\ The idea of the vivifying 
fire - Heraclitus (6th Century B.C.) calls it the 'artistic' fire running 
through all things - is a legacy of Persian magic. Its invisible effect 
supposedly distinguishes the Work of the alchemists from that 
of the profane chemists. The natural sun, however, consists of the 
known, consuming fire, whose precisely dosed use also deter- 
mines the success of the enterprise. 
Empedocles also taught that all life lay in the movement 
resulting from the clash between the two polar forces, love and 
conflict. In the Opus Magnum these correspond to the two alter- 
nating processes of dissolution and coagulation, disintegration 
and bonding, distillation and condensation, systole and diastole, 
"the yes and no in all things". (J. Böhme) They correspond to the 
two polar agents of Arabic alchemy: mercury and sulphur, philo¬ 
sophical quicksilver and brimstone, sun and moon, white woman 
and red man. The climax of the Work is the moment of conjunctio, 
the conjunction of the male and female principle in the marriage of 
heaven and earth, of fiery spirit and watery matter (materia from 
the Latin mater, mother). The indestructible product of this cosmic 
sex act is the lapis, the "red son of the Sun". 
William Blake identified the male principle with time and the 
female with space. The interpenetration of the two results in di¬ 
verse reverberations of individual events, all of which, taken as 
a whole - totality, the micro-macrocosmic body of Christ in the 
image of the "human and the divine imagination - occur in a state 
of relative simultaneity. Each individual element opens up, in pass- 
ing, into the permanent present of this fluctuating organism and in 
the process attains its "fourfold", complete form, which Blake 
calls "Jerusalem". This Vision generated the kaleidoscopic, narra¬ 
tive structures of his late poems, which reveal themselves to the 
reader as a multi-layered structure of perspectival relations - 
aimed against the prevailing idea of a simple location of events in 
24 
Introduction 
Introduction 
25

--- PAGE 14 ---
Introduction 
Introduction 
Francis Bacon, 
Study from the 
death mask of 
William Blake. 
1955 (detail) 
the absolutes of linear time and space, which Newton (1643-1727) 
took as his foundation in formulating his physical laws. 
Behind the often crude imaginings of the English painter- 
poet, with all necessary clarity of detail, lies the most intelligent 
and far-sighted critique of the materialist-mechanistic cosmology 
of the I7th and i8th centuries, a cosmology whose terrible influ- 
ence still prevails to this day, on a global scale. 
In alchemy, the female mercurial principle symbolizes the pro- 
tean aspect of natural processes, their fluid changeability. "The 
process laboratory-workers wanted to rule him (Mercurius)... and 
force him into (the) process" writes Johannis de Monte Raphim; 
but he constantly escapes, and if one thinks about him, he turns 
into thoughts, and if one passes judgment upon him, he is judg- 
ment itself. ("Vorbothe der Morgenröthe", in: Deutsches Theetrum 
Chemicum, Nuremberg, 1728) 
The physicists of the 20th Century encountered this oscillating 
principle behind the iron curtain of Newtonian physics in the 
depths of quantum mechanics, where it has proven impossible to 
determine both precisely and simultaneously the position and the 
impulse of minute particles. It has also been demonstrated that 
the appearance of subatomic particles is dependent on the act of 
Observation itself. With regard to the work of the alchemists, we 
could discuss the problem of projection, of transference through 
imagination, at a purely psychological level. But at the micro- 
physical level it has been shown that the subject and object of 
perception are ontologically, inextricably linked. Subjectivity 
was recognized as a formative influence within the process of 
nature in its entirety which, according to the Statements of some 
alchemists, consists in the constant reversal of inner and outer. 
In his final lecture in 1941, the mathematician Alfred North 
Whitehead (1861-1947), who in his Platonically inspired 'organis- 
mic philosophy' developed concepts to overcome the 'bifurcation 
of nature1 into the spheres of subjective perception and objective 
facts, boiled down the philosophical consistency of the mercurial 
discoveries of modern physics to the concise Observation: "Exact - 
ness is a fake". 
In alchemy, the necessary counterforce to mercury, a force 
which also defines and shapes, is represented by male sulphur. 
26 
Hermes Trismegis- 
tus and the Creative 
fire that unites the 
polarities. 
D. Stolcius von 
Stolcenberg, Viri- 
darium chymicum, 
Frankfurt, 1624 
Jtfl 
«Jk 
jf? jff 1 
Dissolution and 
bonding, or 
mercury and 
sulphur in the 
image of eagle 
and toad. 
D. Stolcius von 
Stolcenberg, 
Viridarium 
chymicum, 
Frankfurt, 1624 
iNrpoDucnoN 
27 
Introduction