institution. The first decree of the Commune, therefore, was the suppression of the
standing army , and the substitution for it of the armed people.
The Commune was formed of the municipal councillors, chosen by universal suffrage
in the various wards of the town, responsible and revocable at short terms. The
majority of its members were naturally working men, or acknowledged
representatives of the working class. The Commune was to be a working, not a
parliamentary body , executive and legislative at the same time.
Instead of continuing to be the agent of the Central Government, the police was at
once stripped of its political attributes, and turned into the responsible, and at all times
revocable, agent of the Commune. So were the officials of all other branches of the
administration. From the members of the Commune downwards, the public service
had to be done at workman’ s wage . The vested interests and the representation
allowances of the high dignitaries of state disappeared along with the high dignitaries
themselves. Public functions ceased to be the private property of the tools of the
Central Governme nt. Not only municipal administration, but the whole initiative
hitherto exercised by the state was laid into the hands of the Commune.
Having once got rid of the standing army and the police – the physical force elements
of the old governm ent – the Commu ne was anxious to break the spiritual force of
repression, the “parson-power ,” by the disestablishment and disendowment of all
churches as proprietary bodies. The priests were sent back to the recesses of private
life, there to feed upon the alms of the faithful in imitation of their predecessors, the
apostles.
The whole of the educational instituti ons were opened to the people gratuitously , and
at the same time cleared of all interference of church and state. Thus, not only was
education made accessible to all, but science itself freed from the fetters which class
prejudice and governmental force had imposed upon it.
The judicial functionaries were to be divested of that sham independence which had
but served to mask their abject subserviency to all succeeding governments to which,
in turn, they had taken, and broken, the oaths of allegiance. Like the rest of public
servants, magistrates and judges were to be elective, responsible, and revocable.
88The Paris Commune was, of course, to serve as a model to all the great industrial
centres of France. The communal regime once established in Paris and the secondary
centres, the old centralized government would in the provinces, too, have to give way
to the self-government of the producers.
In a rough sketch of national organization, which the Commune had no time to
develop, it states clearly that the Com mune was to be the political form of even the
smallest country hamlet, and that in the rural districts the standing army was to be
replaced by a national militia, with an extremely short term of service. The rural
communities of every district were to administer their common affairs by an assembly
of delegates in the central town, and these district assemblies were again to send
deputies to the National Delegation in Paris, each delegate to be at any time revocable
and bound by the mandat imperatif  (formal instructions) of his constituents. The few
but impor tant funct ions which would still remain for a central government were not to
be suppre ssed, as has been intentionally misstated, but were to be discharged by
Communal and thereafter responsible agents.
The unity  of the nation was not to be broken, but, on the contrary , to be organized by
Communal Constitution, and to become a reality by the destruction of the state power
which claimed to be the embodiment of that unity independent of, and superior to, the
nation itself, from which it was but a parasitic excrescence.
While the merely repressive organs of the old governmental power were to be
amputated, its legitimate functions were to be wrested from an authority usurping pre-
eminence over society itself, and restored to the responsible agents of socie ty. Instead
of deciding once in three or six years which member of the ruling class was to
misrepresent the people in Parliame nt, universal suffrage was to serve the people,
constituted in Communes, as individ ual suffrage serves every other employer in the
search for the workmen and managers in his business. And it is well-known that
companies, like individuals, in matters of real business generally know how to put the
right man in the right place, and, if they for once make a mistake, to redress it
promptly . On the other hand, nothing could be more foreign to the spirit of the
Commune than to supercede universal suf frage by hierarchical investiture.
It is generally the fate of completely new historical creations to be mistaken for the
counterparts of older , and even defunc t, forms of social life, to which they may bear a
certain likeness. Thus, this new Commune, which breaks with the modern state power ,
has been  mistaken for a reproduct ion of the medieval Communes, which first
preceded, and afterward became the substratum of, that very state power . The
Communal Consti tution has been mistaken for an attempt to break up into the
federation of small states, as dreamt of by Montesquieu and the Girondins , that unity
of great nations which, if originally brought about by political force, has now become
a powerfu l coefficient of social production. The antagonism of the Commune against
the state power has been mistaken for an exaggerated form of the ancient struggle
against over-centralization. Peculiar historical circumstances may have prevented the
classical development, as in France, of the bourgeois form of government, and may
have allowed, as in England, to complete the great central state organs by corrupt
89vestries, jobbing councillors, and ferocious poor-law guardians in the towns, and
virtually hereditary magistrates in the counties.
The Communal Constitution would have restored to the social body all the forces
hitherto absorbed by the state parasite  feeding upon, and clogging the free movement
of, society . By this one act, it would have initiated the regeneration of France.
The provincial French bourgeois saw in the Commune an attempt to restore the sway
their order had held over the country under Louis Philippe, and which, under Louis
Napoleon, was supplanted by the pretended rule of the country over the towns. In
reality , the Communal Constitution brought the rural producers under the intellectual
lead of the central towns of their districts, and there secured to them, in the working
men, the natural trustees of their interests. The very existence of the Commune
involved, as a matter of course, local municipal liberty , but no longer as a check upon
the now superseded state power . It could only enter into the head of a Bismarck –
who, when not engaged on his intrigues of blood and iron, always likes to resume his
old trade, so befitting his mental calibre, of contributor to Kladderadatsch  (the Berlin
Punch ) – it could only enter into such a head to ascribe to the Paris Commune
aspirations after the caricature of the old French municipal organization of 1791, the
Prussian municipal constitution which degrades the town governments to mere
secondary wheels in the police machinery of the Prussian state. The Comm une made
that catchword of bourgeois revolutio ns – cheap government – a reality by destroying
the two greatest sources of expenditure: the standing army and state functio narism. Its
very exist ence presupposed the non-existence of monarchy , which, in Europe at least,
is the normal encumbrance and indispensable cloak of class rule. It supplied the
republic with the basis of really democratic institutions. But neither cheap government
nor the “true republic” was its ultimate aim; they were its mere concomitants.
The multiplicity of interpretations to which the Commune has been subjected, and the
multiplicity of interests which construed it in their favor , show that it was a
thoroughly expansive political form, while all the previous forms of government had
been emphatically repressive. Its true secret was this: It was essentially a working
class government,  the product of the struggle of the producing against the
appropriating class, the political form at last discovered under which to work out the
economical emancipation of labor .
Except on this last condition, the Communal Constitution would have been an
impossibility and a delusion. The political rule of the producer cannot co-exist with
the perpetuation of his social slavery . The Commune was therefore to serve as a lever
for uprooting the economical founda tion upon which rests the existence of classes,
and therefore of class rule. With labor emancipated, every man becomes a working
man, and productive labor ceases to be a class attribute.
It is a strange fact. In spite of all the tall talk and all the immense literature, for the last
60 years, about emancipation of labor , no sooner do the working men anywhere take
the subjec t into their own hands with a will, than uprises at once all the apologetic
phraseology of the mouthpieces of present society with its two poles of capital and
wage-slavery (the landlord now is but the sleeping partner of the capitalist), as if the
capitalist society was still in its purest state of virgin innocence, with its antagonisms
90still undeveloped, with its delusions still unexploded, with its prostitute realities not
yet laid bare. The Commune, they exclaim, intends to abolish property , the basis of all
civilization!
Yes, gentlemen, the Commune intend ed to abolish that class property which makes
the labor of the many the wealth of the few. It aimed at the expropriation of the
expropriators. It wanted to make individual property a truth by transforming the
means of production, land, and capital, now chiefly the means of enslaving and