locating the source of wealth not in the object but in a subjective activity - in
commercial and manufacturing activ ity - even though it still always conceives this
activity within narrow boundaries, as moneymaking. In contrast to this system, that of
the Physiocrats posits a certain kind of labour - agriculture - as the creator  of wealth,
and the object itself no longer appea rs in a monetary disguise, but as the product in
general, as the general result of labour . This product, as befits the narrow ness of the
activity , still always remains a naturally determined product - the product of
agriculture, the product of the earth par excellence.
It was an immense step forward for Adam Smith to throw out every limiting
specification of wealth-creating activ ity - not only manufacturing, or commercial or
agricultural labour , but one as well as the others, labour in general. With the abstract
universality of wealth-creating activi ty we now have the universality of the object
defined as wealth, the product as such or again labour as such, but labour as past,
objectified labour . How difficult and great was this transition may be seen from how
Adam Smith himself from time to time still falls back into the Physiocra tic system.
Now , it might seem that all that had been achieved thereby was to discover the
abstract expression  for the simplest and most ancient relation in which human beings -
in whatever form of society - play the role of producers. This is correct in one respect.
Not in another . Indif ference towards any specific kind of labour presupposes a very
developed totality of real kinds of labour , of which no single one is any longer
predominant. As a rule, the most general abstractions arise only in the midst of the
richest possible concrete developmen t, where one thing appears as common to many ,
to all. Then it ceases to be thinkable in a particular form alone. On the other side, this
abstraction of labour as such is not merely the mental product of a concrete totality of
labours. Indif feren ce towards specific labours corresponds to a form of society in
which individuals can with ease transfer from one labour to another , and where the
specific kind is a matter of chance for them, hence of indifference. Not only the
category , labour , but labour in reality has here become the means of creating wealth in
general, and has ceased to be organically linked with particular individuals in any
specific form. Such a state of affairs is at its most developed in the most modern form
of existence of bourgeois society - in the United States. Here, then,  for the first time,
the point of departure of modern economics, namely the abstraction of the category
‘labour ’, ‘labour as such’, labour pure and simple, becomes true in practice. The
simplest abstraction, then, which modern economics places at the head of its
discussions, and which expresses an immeasurably ancient relation valid in all forms
of society , nevertheless achieves practical truth as an abstraction only as a category of
the most modern society . One could say that this indifference towards particular kinds
of labour , which is a historic produc t in the United States, appears e.g. among the
Russians as a spon taneous inclination. But there is a devil of a differenc e between
barbarians who are fit by nature to be used for anything, and civilized people who
apply themselves to everything. And then in practice the Russian indifference to the
specific character of labour corresponds to being embedded by tradition within a very
specific kind of labour , from which only external influences can jar them loose.
118This exam ple of labour shows strikingly how even the most abstract categories,
despite their validity - precisely because of their abstractness - for all epochs, are
nevertheless, in the specific charac ter of this abstraction, themselves likewise a
product of historic relations, and possess their full validity only for and within these
relations.
Bour geois society is the most develo ped and the most complex historic organization
of production. The categories which  express its relations, the comprehen sion of its
structure, thereby also allows insights into the structure and the relations of
production of all the vanished social  formations out of whose ruins and elements it
built itself up, whose partly still unconquered remnants are carried along within it,
whose mere nuances have developed explicit significance within it, etc. Human
anatomy contains a key to the anatomy of the ape. The intimations of higher
development among the subordinate animal species, however , can be understood only
after the higher development is already known. The bourgeois economy thus supplies
the key to the ancient, etc. But not at all in the manner of those economists who
smudge over all historical differences and see bourgeois relations in all forms of
society . One can understand tribute, tithe, etc., if one is acquainted with ground rent.
But one must not identify them. Further, since bourgeois society is itself only a
contradictory form  of development, relations derived from earlier forms will often be
found within it only in an entirely stunted  form, or even travestied. For example,
communal property . Although it is true, therefore, that the categories of bourgeois
economics possess a truth for all other forms of society , this is to be taken only with a
grain of salt. They  can contain them in a developed, or stunted, or carica tured form
etc., but always with an essential difference. The so-called historical presentation of
development is founded, as a rule, on the fact that the latest form regards the previous
ones as steps leading up to itself, and, since it is only rarely and only under quite
specific conditions able to criticize itself - leaving aside, of course, the historical
periods which appear to themselves as times of decadence - it always conceives them
one-sidedly . The Christian religion was able to be of assistance in reaching an
objective understanding of earlier mythologies only when its own self-criticism had
been accomplished  to a certain degree, so to speak, dunamei . Likewise, bourgeois
economics arrived  at an understanding of feudal, ancient, oriental econo mics only
after the self-criticism of bourgeois society had begun. In so far as the bourgeois
economy did not mythologically identify itself altogether with the past, its critique of
the previous economies, notably of feudalism, with which it was still engaged in
direct struggle, resembled the critiqu e which Christianity levelled against paganism,
or also that of Protestantism against Catholicism.
In the succession of the economic categories, as in any other historical, social science,
it must not be forgotten that their subject - here, modern bourgeois society - is always
what is given, in the head as well as in reality , and that these categories therefore
express the forms of being, the characteristics of existence, and often only individual
sides of this specific society , this subject, and that therefore this society by no means
begins only at the point where one can speak of it as such; this holds for science as
well.  This is to be kept in mind because it will shortly be decisive for the order and
sequence of the categories. For example, nothing seems more natural than to begin
119with ground rent, with landed property , since this is bound up with the earth, the
source of all production and of all being, and with the first form of production of all
more or less settled  societies - agricu lture. But nothing would be more erroneous. In
all forms of society  there is one specific kind of production which predom inates over
the rest, whose relations thus assign rank and influence to the others. It is a general
illumination which  bathes all the other colours and modifies their particularity . It is a
particular ether which determines the specific gravity of every being which has
materialized within it. For example, with pastoral peoples (mere hunting and fishing
peoples lie outside the point where real development begins). Certain forms of tillage
occur among them,  sporadic ones. Landed property is determined by this. It is held in
common, and retains this form to a greater or lesser degree according to the greater or
lesser degree of attachment displayed by these peoples to their tradition, e.g. the
communal propert y of the Slavs. Among peoples with a settled agriculture - this
settling already a great step - where this predominates, as in antiquity and in the
feudal order, even industry , together with its organization and the forms of property
corresponding to it, has a more or less landed-proprietary character; is either
completely depend ent on it, as among the earlier Romans, or, as in the Middle Ages,
imitates, within the city and its relations, the organization of the land. In the Middle
Ages, capital itself - apart from pure money-capital - in the form of the traditional
artisans’  tools etc., has this landed-proprietary character . In bourgeois socie ty it is the
opposite. Agricultu re more and more  becomes merely a branch of industry , and is
entirely dominated  by capital. Ground rent likewise. In all forms where landed
property rules, the natural relation still predominant. In those where capital rules, the
social, historically created element. Ground rent cannot be understood without capital.
But capital can certainly be understood without ground rent. Capital is the all-
dominating econom ic power of bourgeois society . It must form the starting-point as
well as the finishing-point, and must be dealt with before landed property . After both
have been examined in particular , their interrelation must be examined.
It would therefore be unfeasible and wrong to let the economic categories follow one
another in the same sequence as that in which they were historically decisive. Their