II. It is high time that Communists should openly , in the face of the whole world,
publish their views, their aims, their tendencies, and meet this nursery tale of the
Spectre of Communism with a manifesto of the party itself.
To this end, Com munists of various nationalities have assembled in London and
sketched the following manifesto, to be published in the English, French, German,
Italian, Flemish and Danish .
I. Bourgeois and Pr oletarians
The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles.
Freeman and slave, patrician and plebeian, lord and serf, guild-master and
journeyman, in a word, oppressor and oppressed, stood in constant opposition to one
another , carried on an uninterrupted,  now hidden, now open fight, a fight that each
time ended, either in a revolutionary reconstitution of society at large, or in the
common ruin of the contending classes.
In the earlier epoch s of history , we find almost everywhere a complicated arrangement
of society into various orders, a manifold gradation of social rank. In ancient Rome
we have patricians, knights, plebeia ns, slaves; in the Middle Ages, feudal lords,
vassals, guild-mast ers, journeymen, apprentices, serfs; in almost all of these classes,
again, subordinate gradations.
The modern bourgeois society that has sprouted from the ruins of feudal society has
not done away with class antagonisms. It has but established new classes, new
conditions of oppression, new forms of struggle in place of the old ones.
Our epoc h, the epoch of the bourgeoisie, possesses, however , this distinct feature: it
has simpl ified class antagonisms. Society as a whole is more and more splitting up
into two great hostile camps, into two great classes directly facing each other –
Bour geoisie and Proletariat.
63From the serfs of the Middle Ages sprang the chartered burghers of the earliest towns.
From these bur gesses the first elements of the bour geoisie were developed.
The discovery of America, the rounding of the Cape, opened up fresh ground for the
rising bourgeoisie. The East-Indian and Chinese markets, the colonisation of America,
trade with the colonies, the increase in the means of exchange and in commodities
generally , gave to commerce, to navigation, to industry , an impulse never before
known, and thereb y, to the revolutio nary element in the tottering feudal  society , a
rapid development.
The feudal system of industry , in which industrial production was mono polised by
closed guilds, now no longer sufficed for the growing wants of the new markets. The
manufacturing system took its place.  The guild-masters were pushed on one side by
the manufacturing bourgeois; division  of labour between the different corporate guilds
vanished in the face of division of labour in each single workshop.
Meantime the markets kept ever grow ing, the demand ever rising. Even manufacturer
no longer sufficed. Thereupon, steam and machinery revolutionised industrial
production. The place of manufactur e was taken by the giant, Modern Industry; the
place of the industrial bourgeois by industrial millionaires, the leaders of the whole
industrial armies, the modern bour geois.
Modern industry has established the world market, for which the discovery of
America paved the way. This market has given an immense development to
commerce, to navigation, to communication by land. This development has, in its
turn, reacted on the extension of industry; and in proportion as industry , commerce,
navigation, railways extended, in the same proportion the bourgeoisie developed,
increased its capital, and pushed into the background every class handed down from
the Middle Ages.
We see, therefore, how the modern bourgeoisie is itself the product of a long course of
development, of a series of revolutions in the modes of production and of exchange.
Each step in the development of the bourgeoisie was accompanied by a corresponding
political advance of that class. An oppressed class under the sway of the feudal
nobility , an armed and self-governin g association in the medieval comm une: here
independent urban republic (as in Italy and Germany); there taxable “third estate” of
the monarchy (as in France); afterw ards, in the period of manufacturing proper ,
serving either the semi-feudal or the absolute monarchy as a counterpoise against the
nobility , and, in fact, cornerstone of the great monarchies in general, the bourgeoisie
has at last, since the establishment of Modern Industry and of the world market,
conquered for itself, in the modern representative State, exclusive political sway . The
executive of the modern state is but a committee for managing the common affairs of
the whole bour geoisie.
The bour geoisie, historically , has played a most revolutionary part.
The bourgeoisie, wherever it has got the upper hand, has put an end to all feudal,
patriarchal, idyllic relations. It has pitilessly torn asunder the motley feudal ties that
bound man to his “natural superiors,”  and has left remaining no other nexus between
man and man than naked self-interest, than callous “cash payment.” It has drowned
the most heavenly ecstasies of religious fervour , of chivalrous enthusiasm, of
64philistine sentimentalism, in the icy water of egotistical calculation. It has resolved
personal worth into exchange value, and in place of the numberless indefeasible
chartered freedoms, has set up that single, unconscionable freedom – Free Trade. In
one word, for explo itation, veiled by religious and political illusions, it has substituted
naked, shameless, direct, brutal exploitation.
The bourgeoisie has stripped of its halo every occupation hitherto honoured and
looked up to with reverent awe. It has converted the physician, the lawyer , the priest,
the poet, the man of science, into its paid wage labourers.
The bourgeoisie has torn away from the family its sentimental veil, and has reduced
the family relation to a mere money relation.
The bourgeoisie has disclosed how it came to pass that the brutal display of vigour in
the Middle Ages, which reactionaries so much admire, found its fitting complement in
the most slothful indolence. It has been the first to show what man’ s activity can bring
about. It has accomplished wonders far surpassing Egyptian pyramid s, Roman
aqueducts, and Gothic cathedrals; it has conducted expeditions that put in the shade
all former Exoduses of nations and crusades.
The bourgeoisie cannot exist without constantly revolutionising the instruments of
production, and thereby the relations of production, and with them the whole relations
of society . Conserv ation of the old modes of production in unaltered form, was, on the
contrary , the first condition of exist ence for all earlier industrial classes. Constant
revolutionising of production, uninterrupted disturbance of all social conditions,
everlasting uncerta inty and agitation distinguish the bourgeois epoch from all earlier
ones. All fixed, fast-frozen relations, with their train of ancient and venerable
prejudices and opinions, are swept away , all new-formed ones become antiquated
before they can ossify . All that is solid melts into air, all that is holy is profaned, and
man is at last compelled to face with sober senses his real conditions of life, and his
relations with his kind.
The need of a constantly expanding market for its products chases the bourgeoisie
over the entire surface of the globe. It must nestle everywhere, settle everywhere,
establish connections everywhere.
The bourgeoisie has through its exploitation of the world market given a cosmopolitan
character to production and consump tion in every country . To the great chagrin of
Reactionists, it has drawn from under the feet of industry the national ground on
which it stood. All old-established national industries have been destroyed or are daily
being destroyed. They are dislodged by new industries, whose introduction becomes a
life and death question for all civilised nations, by industries that no longer work up
indigenous raw material, but raw material drawn from the remotest zones ; industries
whose products are consumed, not only at home, but in every quarter of the globe. In
place of the old wants, satisfied by the production of the country , we find new wants,
requiring for their satisfaction the products of distant lands and climes. In place of the
old local and natio nal seclusion and self-suf ficiency , we have intercours e in every
direction, universal inter-dependence of nations. And as in material, so also in
intellectual production. The intellectual creations of individual nations become
common property . National one-sidedness and narrow-mindedness become more and
65more impossible, and from the nume rous national and local literatures, there arises a
world literature.
The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by the
immensely facilita ted means of communication, draws all, even the most  barbarian,
nations into civilisa tion. The cheap prices of commodities are the heavy artillery with
which it batters down all Chinese walls, with which it forces the barbarians ’ intensely
obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate. It compels all nations, on pain of
extinction, to adopt the bourgeois mode of production; it compels them to introduce
what it calls civilisation into their midst, i.e., to become bourgeois themsel ves. In one
word, it creates a world after its own image.
The bourgeoisie has subjected the country to the rule of the towns. It has created
enormous cities, has greatly increase d the urban population as compare d with the
rural, and has thus rescued a conside rable part of the population from the idiocy of
rural life. Just as it has made the country dependent on the towns, so it has made
barbarian and semi-barbarian countri es dependent on the civilised ones, nations of
peasants on nations of bour geois, the East on the West.