themselves are driven with kicks from  their Pythian tripods, hauled out of their beds
in the darkness of night, put in prison  vans, thrown into dungeons or sent into exile;
their temple is razed to the ground, their mouths are sealed, their pens broken, their
law torn to pieces in the name of religion, of property , of the family , of order .
Bour geois fanatics for order are shot down on their balconies by mobs of drunken
soldiers, their domestic sanctuaries profaned, their houses bombarded for amusement
- in the name of property , of the family , of religion, and of order . Finally , the scum of
bourgeois society forms the holy phalanx of order and the hero Crapulinski installs
himself in the Tuileries as the “savior of society .”
 
103Grundrisse. Introduction (1857)
Production, Consumption, Distribution, Exchange
(Circulation)
(1) Producti on
Independent Individuals. Eighteenth-century Ideas.
The object before us, to begin with, material pr oduction .
Individuals produc ing in Society - hence socially determined individual production -
is, of course, the point of departure. The individual and isolated hunter and fisherman,
with whom Smith and Ricardo begin, belongs among the unimaginative conceits of
the eighte enth-century Robinsonades, which in no way express merely a reaction
against over-sophistication and a return to a misunderstood natural life, as cultural
historians imagine. As little as Rousseau’ s contrat social , which brings naturally
independent, autonomous subjects into relation and connection by contract, rests on
such naturalism. This is the sembl ance, the merely aesthetic semblance, of the
Robinsonades, great and small. It is, rather , the anticipation of ‘civil society’, in
preparation since the sixteenth centur y and making giant strides towards maturity in
the eighteenth. In this society of free competition, the individual appears detached
from the natural bonds etc. which in earlier historical periods make him the accessory
of a definite and limited human conglomerate. Smith and Ricardo still stand with both
feet on the shoulde rs of the eighteenth-century prophets, in whose imagin ations this
eighteenth-century individual - the product on one side of the dissolution of the feudal
forms of society , on the other side of the new forces of production develope d since the
sixteenth century - appears as an ideal, whose existence they project into the past. Not
as a historic result but as history’ s point of departure. As the Natural Individual
appropriate to their notion of human nature, not arising historically , but posited by
nature. This illusion has been common to each new epoch to this day. Steuart avoided
this simple-minded ness because as an aristocrat and in antithesis to the eighteenth
century , he had in some respects a more historical footing.
The more deeply we go back into history , the more does the individual, and hence also
the producing individual, appear as dependent, as belonging to a greater whole: in a
still quite natural way in the family and in the family expanded into the clan [Stamm ];
then later in the various forms of communal society arising out of the antitheses and
fusions of the clan. Only in the eighteenth century , in ‘civil society’, do the various
forms of social connectedness confro nt the individual as a mere means towards his
private purposes, as external necessity . But the epoch which produces this standpoint,
that of the isolated  individual, is also precisely that of the hitherto most  developed
social (from this standpoint, general) relations. The human being is in the most literal
sense a Zwon politikon  not merely a gregarious animal, but an animal which can
individuate itself only in the midst of society . Production by an isolated individual
104outside society - a rare exception which may well occur when a civilized person in
whom the social forces are already dynamically present is cast by accide nt into the
wilderness - is as much of an absurd ity as is the development of language without
individuals living together  and talking to each other . There is no point in dwelling on
this any longer . The point could go entirely unmentioned if this twaddle, which had
sense and reason for the eighteenth-century characters, had not been earnestly pulled
back into the centre of the most modern economics by Bastiat, Carey , Proudhon etc.
Of course it is a convenience for Proudhon et al. to be able to give a historico-
philosophic account of the source of an economic relation, of whose historic origins
he is ignorant, by inventing the myth that Adam or Prometheus stumbled on the idea
ready-made, and then it was adopted, etc. Nothing is more dry and boring than the
fantasies of a locus communis .
Eternalization of historic relations of production - Production
and distribution in general. - Property
Whenever we speak of production, then, what is meant is always production at a
definite stage of social development - production by social individuals. It might seem,
therefore, that in order to talk about production at all we must either pursue the
process of historic development through its different phases, or declare beforehand
that we are dealing with a specific historic epoch such as e.g. modern  bourgeois
production, which is indeed our particular theme. However , all epochs of production
have certain common traits, common characteristics. Production in general  is an
abstraction, but a rational abstraction  in so far as it really brings out and fixes the
common element and thus saves us repetition. Still, this general  category , this
common element sifted out by comparison, is itself segmented many times over and
splits into different determinations. Some determinations belong to all epochs, others
only to a few. [Some] determinations will be shared by the most modern epoch and
the most ancient. No production will be thinkable without them; however even though
the most developed languages have laws and characteristics in common with the least
developed, nevertheless, just those things which determine their development, i.e. the
elements which are not general and common, must be separated out from the
determinations valid for production as such, so that in their unity - which arises
already from the identity of the subject, humanity , and of the object, nature - their
essential difference is not forgotten. The whole profundity of those modern
economists who demonstrate the eternity and harmoniousness of the existing social
relations lies in this forgetting. For example. No production possible without an
instrument of production, even if this instrument is only the hand. No production
without stored-up, past labour , even if it is only the facility gathered together and
concentrated in the hand of the savage by repeated practice. Capital is, among other
things, also an instrument of production, also objectified, past labour . Therefore
capital is a general, eternal relation of nature; that is, if I leave out just the specific
quality which alone makes ‘instrument of production’  and ‘stored-up labour ’ into
capital. The entire history of production relations thus appears to Carey , for example,
as a malicious for gery perpetrated by governments.
105If there is no production in general, then there is also no general production.
Production is always a particular  branch of production - e.g. agriculture, cattle-raising
manufactures etc. - or it is a totality . But political economy is not techn ology . The
relation of the general characteristi cs of production at a given stage of social
development to the particular forms of production to be developed elsewhere (later).
Lastly , production also is not only a particular production. Rather , it is always a
certain social body , a social subject, which is active in a greater or sparser totality of
branches of production. Nor does the relationship between scientific presentation and
the real movement belong here yet. Production in general. Particular branches of
production. Totality of production.
It is the fashion to preface a work of economics with a general part - and precisely this
part figur es under the title ‘production’  (see for example J. St. Mill) - treating of the
general preconditions  of all production. This general part consists or is alleged to
consist of (1) the conditions without which production is not possible. I.e. in fact, to
indicate nothing more than the essen tial moments of all production. But, as we will
see, this reduces itself in fact to a few very simple characteristics, which are
hammered out into flat tautologies; (2) the conditions which promote production to a
greater or lesser degree, such as e.g. Adam Smith’ s progressive and stagna nt state of
society . While this is of value in his work as an insight, to elevate it to scientific
significance would  require investigations into the periodization of degrees of
productivity  in the development of individual peoples - an investigation which lies
outside the proper boundaries of the theme, but, in so far as it does belong there, must
be brough t in as part of the develop ment of competition, accumulation etc. In the
usual form ulation, the answer amounts to the general statement that an industrial
people reaches the peak of its production at the moment when it arrives at its
historical peak generally . In fact. The industrial peak of a people when its main
concern is not yet gain, but rather to gain. Thus the Yankees over the English. Or, also,
that e.g. certain races, locations, climates, natural conditions such as harbours, soil
fertility etc. are more advantageous to production than others. This too amounts to the
tautology that wealth is more easily created where its elements are subjectively and
objectively present to a greater degree.
But none of all this is the economists’  real concern in this general part. The aim is,
rather , to present production - see e.g. Mill - as distinct from distribution etc., as