and wom en are not forgiven the unguarded hour in which the first adventurer who
came along could violate them. Such turns of speech do not solve the riddle but only
formulate it differently . It remains to be explained how a nation of thirty-s ix millions
can be surprised and delivered without resistance into captivity by three knights of
industry .
Let us recapitulate  in general outlin e the phases that the French Revolution went
through from February 24, 1848, to December , 1851.
Three main periods are unmistakable: the February period; the period of the
constitution of the republic or the Constituent National Assembly - May 1848 to May
28 1849; and the period of the constitutional republic or the Legislative National
Assembly - May 28 1849 to December 2 1851.
The first period  - from February 24, the overthrow of Louis Philippe, to May 4, 1848,
the meeting of the Constituent Assembly - the February period proper , may be
designated as the prologue of the revolution. Its character was officially expressed in
the fact that the government it improvised itself declared that it was provisional, and
like the government, everything that was mentioned, attempted, or enunciated during
this period proclaimed itself to be only provisional. Nobody and nothing ventured to
lay any claim to the right of existence and of real action. All the elements that had
prepared or determined the revolut ion - the dynastic opposition, the republican
bourgeoisie, the democratic-republican petty bourgeoisie, and the social-democratic
workers, provisionally found their place in the February government.
It could not be otherwise. The February days originally intended an electo ral reform
by which the circle  of the politically privileged among the possessing class itself was
100to be widened and the exclusive domination of the aristocracy of finance overthrown.
When it came to the actual conflict, however - when the people mounted the
barricades, the National Guard maintained a passive attitude, the army offered no
serious resistance, and the monarchy ran away - the republic appeared to be a matter
of course. Every party construed it in its own way. Having secured it arms in hand, the
proletariat impresse d its stamp upon it and proclaimed it to be a social republic. There
was thus indicated the general conten t of the modern revolution, a content which was
in most singular contradiction to everything that, with the material available, with the
degree of education attained by the masses, under the given circums tances and
relations, could be immediately realiz ed in practice. On the other hand, the claims of
all the remaining elements that had collaborated in the February Revolution were
recognized by the lion’s share they obtained in the government. In no period,
therefore, do we find a more confu sed mixture of high-flown phrases and actual
uncertainty and clumsiness, of more enthusiastic striving for innovation and more
deeply rooted domination of the old routine, of more apparent harmony of the whole
of society; and more profound estrangement of its elements. While the Paris
proletariat still revelled in the vision of the wide prospects that had opened before it
and indulged in seriously meant discussions of social problems, the old powers of
society had grouped themselves, assembled, reflected, and found unexpected support
in the mass of the nation, the peasants and petty bourgeois, who all at once stormed
onto the political stage after the barriers of the July Monarchy had fallen.
The secon d period , from May 4, 1848, to the end of May, 1849, is the period of the
constitution, the foundation, of the bourgeois republic. Immediately after the February
days not only had the dynastic opposition been surprised by the republicans and the
republicans by the socialists, but all France by Paris. The National Assem bly, which
met on May 4, 1848, had emer ged from the national elections and repre sented the
nation. It was a living protest against the pretensions of the February days and was to
reduce the results of the revolution to the bourgeois scale. In vain the Paris proletariat,
which immediately  grasped the character of this National Assembly , attempted on
May 15, a few days after it met, to negate its existence forcibly , to dissolve it, to
disintegrate again into its constituent  parts the organic form in which the proletariat
was threatened by the reacting spirit of the nation. As is known, May 15 had no other
result but that of removing Blanqui and his comrades - that is, the real leaders of the
proletarian party - from the public stage for the entire duration of the cycle we are
considering.
The bourgeois monarchy of Louis Philippe can be followed only by a bourgeois
republic; that is to say, whereas a limited section of the bourgeoisie ruled in the name
of the king, the whole of the bourgeoisie will now rule in the name of the people. The
demands of the Paris proletariat are utopian nonsense, to which an end must be put.
To this declaration of the Constituent  National Assembly the Paris proleta riat replied
with the June insurrection, the most colossal event in the history of Euro pean civil
wars. The bourgeois republic triumphed. On its side stood the aristocracy of finance,
the indus trial bourgeoisie, the bourgeois, the petty bourgeois, the army , the lumpen
proletariat organized as the Mobile Guard, the intellectual lights, the clergy, and the
rural population. On the side of the Paris proletariat stood none but itself. More than
101three thousand insur gents were butch ered after the victory , and fifteen thousand were
deported without trial. With this defeat the proletariat passes into the background on
the revolu tionary stage. It attempts to press forward again on every occasion, as soon
as the movement appears to make a fresh start, but with ever decreased expenditure of
strength and always slighter results. As soon as one of the social strata above it gets
into revolutionary ferment, the proleta riat enters into an alliance with it and so shares
all the defeats that the different parties suffer, one after another . But these subsequent
blows become the weaker , the great er the surface of society over which they are
distributed. The more important leade rs of the proletariat in the Assembly and in the
press successively fall victim to the courts, and ever more equivocal figur es come to
head it. In part it throws itself into doctrinaire experiments, exchange banks and
workers’  associations, hence into a movement in which it renounces the
revolutionizing of the old world by means of the latter ’s own great, combined
resources, and seeks, rather , to achieve its salvation behind society’ s back, in private
fashion, within its limited condition s of existence, and hence necessar ily suffers
shipwreck. It seems to be unable either to rediscover revolutionary greatness in itself
or to win new energy from the conne ctions newly entered into, until all classes with
which it contended in June themselves lie prostrate beside it. But at least it succumbs
with the honours of the great, world-historic struggle; not only France, but all Europe
trembles at the June earthquake, while the ensuing defeats of the upper classes are so
cheaply bought that they require barefaced exaggeration by the victorious party to be
able to pass for events at all, and become the more ignominious the further the
defeated party is removed from the proletarian party .
The defeat of the June insur gents, to be sure, had now prepared, had levelled the
ground on which the bourgeois republic could be founded and built, but it had shown
at the same time that in Europe the questions at issue are other than that of “republic
or monarchy .” It had revealed that here “bour geois republic” signifies the unlimited
despotism of one class over other classes. It had proved that in countries with an old
civilization, with a developed form ation of classes, with modern conditions of
production, and with an intellectual consciousness in which all traditional ideas have
been dissolved by the work of centu ries, the republic signifies in genera l only the
political form of revolution of bourgeois society and not its conservative form of life -
as, for example, in the United States of North America, where, though classes already
exist, they have not yet become fixed, but continually change and interch ange their
elements in constant flux, where the modern means of production, instead of
coinciding with a stagnant surplus population, rather compensate for the relative
deficiency of heads and hands, and where, finally , the feverish, youthful movement of
material production, which has to make a new world of its own, has neither time nor
opportunity left for abolishing the old world of ghosts.
During the June days all classes and parties had united in the party of Order against
the prolet arian class as the party of anarchy , of socialism, of communism. They had
“saved” society from “the enemies of society .” They had given out the watchwords of
the old society , “property , family , religion, order ,” to their army as passwords and had
proclaimed to the counterrevolutiona ry crusaders: “In this sign thou shalt conquer!”
From that moment, as soon as one of the numerous parties which gathered  under this
102sign against the June insur gents seeks to hold the revolutionary battlefield in its own
class interest, it goes down before the cry: “property , family , religion, order.” Society
is saved just as often as the circle of its rulers contracts, as a more exclusive  interest is
maintained against a wider one. Every demand of the simplest bourgeois financial
reform, of the most ordinary liberalism , of the most formal republicanism, of the most
shallow democracy , is simultaneously castigated as an “attempt on society” and
stigmatized as “socialism.” And finally the high priests of “religion and order”