cent, upon the aggregate  sum of their week ly wages took place, there would be an
129advance from 5 Pounds to 6 Pounds. Taking the average, we might say that the
general rate of wages  had risen by 25 per cent, although, in fact, the wages of the ten
men had remained stationary , the wages of the one lot of five men had risen from 5s.
to 6s. only, and the wages of the other lot of five from 55s. to 70s. One half of the men
would not have improved at all their position, one quarter would have improved it in
an imperc eptible degree, and only one quarter would have bettered it really . Still,
reckoning by the average , the total amount of the wages of those twenty men would
have increased by 25 per cent, and as far as the aggregate capital that employs them,
and the prices of the commodities they produce, are concerned, it would be exactly
the same as if all of them had equally shared in the average rise of wages. In the case
of agricultural labour , the standard wages being very different in the different counties
of England and Scotland, the rise af fected them very unequally .
Lastly , during the period when that rise of wages took place counteracting  influences
were at work such as the new taxes consequent upon the Russian war, the extensive
demolition of the dwelling-houses of the agricultural labourers, and so forth. Having
premised so much, I proceed to state that from 1849 to 1859 there took place a rise of
about 40 percent in the average rate of the agricultural wages of Great Britain. I could
give you ample details in proof of my assertion, but for the present purpo se think it
sufficient to refer you to the conscien tious and critical paper read in 1860 by the late
Mr. John C. Morton at the Londo n Society of Arts on "The Forces used in
Agriculture." Mr. Morton gives the returns, from bills and other authentic documents,
which he had collected from about one hundred farmers, residing in twelve Scotch
and thirty-five English counties.
According to our friend Weston's opinion, and taken together with the simultaneous
rise in the wages of the factory operat ives, there ought to have occurred a tremendous
rise in the prices of agricultural produce during the period 1849 to 1859. But what is
the fact? Despite the Russian war, and the consecutive unfavourable harvests from
1854 to 1856, the average price of wheat, which is the leading agricultural produce of
England, fell from about 3 Pounds per quarter for the years 1838 to 1848 to about 2
Pounds 10 Shillings per quarter for the years 1849 to 1859. This constitutes a fall in
the price of wheat of more than 16 percent simultaneously with an average rise of
agricultural wages of 40 percent. During the same period, if we compare its end with
its beginning, 1859 with 1849, there was a decrease of official paupe rism from
934,419 to 860,470, the difference being 73,949; a very small decrease, I grant, and
which in the following years was again lost, but still a decrease.
It might be said that, consequent upon the abolition of the Corn Laws, the import of
foreign corn was more than doubled during the period from 1849 to 1859, as
compared with the period from 1838 to 1848. And what of that? From Citizen
Weston's standpoint one would have expected that this sudden, immense, and
continuously increasing demand upon foreign markets must have sent up the prices of
agricultural produc e there to a frightful height, the effect of increased demand
remaining the same, whether it comes from without or from within. What was the
fact? Apart from some years of failing harvests, during all that period the ruinous fall
in the price of corn formed a standing  theme of declamation in France; the Americans
were again and again compelled to burn their surplus produce; and Russia, if we are to
130believe Mr. Urquhart, prompted the Civil War in the United States because her
agricultural exports were crippled by the Yankee competition in the markets of
Europe.
Reduced to its abstract form , Citizen Weston's argument would come to this: Every
rise in demand occurs always on the basis of a given amount of production. It can,
therefore, never increase the supply of the articles demanded , but can only enhance
their money prices . Now the most common observatio n shows than an increased
demand will, in some instances, leave the market prices of commodities altogether
unchanged, and will, in other instances, cause a temporary rise of market prices
followed by an increased supply , followed by a reduction of the prices to their original
level, and in many cases below  their original level. Whether the rise of demand
springs from surpl us wages, or from any other cause, does not at all change the
conditions of the problem. From Citizen Weston's standpoint the general phenomenon
was as difficult to explain as the phenomenon occurring under the exceptional
circumstances of a rise of wages. His argument had, therefore, no peculiar bearing
whatever upon the subject we treat. It only expressed his perplexity at accounting for
the laws by which an increase of dema nd produces an increase of supply , instead of an
ultimate rise of market prices.
III. Wages and Curren cy
On the second day of the debate our friend Weston clothed his old asserti ons in new
forms. He said: Consequent upon a general rise in money wages, more currency will
be wanted to pay the same wages. The currency being fixed , how can you pay with
this fixed currency increased money wages? First the difficulty arose form the fixed
amount of commo dities accruing to the working man despite his increase  of money
wages; now it arises from the increa sed money wages, despite the fixed amount of
commodities. Of course, if you reject his original dogma, his secondary grievance will
disappear . Howeve r, I shall show that this currency question has nothing at all to do
with the subject before us.
In your country the mechanism of payments is much more perfected than in any other
country of Europe . Thanks to the extent and concentration of the banking system,
much less currency  is wanted to circulate the same amount of values, and to transact
the same or a greater amount of busin ess. For example, as far as wages are concerned,
the Engli sh factory  operative pays his wages weekly to the shopkeeper , who sends
them weekly to the banker , who retur ns them weekly to the manufacturer , who again
pays them away to his working men, and so forth. By this contrivance the yearly
wages of an operat ive, say of 52 Pounds, may be paid by one single Sovere ign turning
round every week in the same circle.  Even in England the mechanism is less perfect
than in Scotland, and is not everywhere equally perfect; and therefore we find, for
example, that in some agricultural districts, much more currency is wanted to circulate
a much smaller amount of values.
If you cross the Channel you will find that the money wages  are much lower than in
England, but that they are circulated in Germany , Italy, Switzerland, and France by a
much larger amount of currency. The same Sove reign will not be so quickly
intercepted by the banker or returned to the industrial capitalist; and, therefore, instead
131of one Sovereign circulating 52 Pounds yearly , you want, perhaps, three Sovereigns to
circulate yearly wages to the amount of 25 Pounds. Thus, by comparing continental
countries with England, you will see at once that low money wages may require a
much larger curren cy for their circulation than high money wages, and that this is, in
fact, a merely technical point, quite foreign to our subject.
According to the best calculations I know , the yearly income of the worki ng class of
this country may be estimated at 250,0 00,000 Pounds. This immense sum is circulated
by about three million Pounds. Suppose a rise of wages of fifty per cent to take place.
Then, instead of three millions of currency, four and a half millions would be wanted.
As a very consider able part of the working-man's daily expenses is laid out in silver
and copper , that is to say, in mere tokens, whose relative value to gold is arbitrarily
fixed by law, like that of inconvertible money paper , a rise of money wages by fifty
per cent would, in the extreme case, require and additional circulation of Sovereigns,
say to the amount of one million. One million, now dormant, in the shape of bullion
or coin, in the cellars of the Bank of England, or of private bankers would  circulate.
But even the triflin g expense resulting from the additional minting or the additional
wear and tear of that million might be spared, and would actually be spared, if any
friction should arise from the want of the additional currency . All of you know that the
currency of this country is divided into two great departments. One sort, supplied by
bank-notes of different descriptions, is used in the transactions between dealers and
dealers, and the larger payments from consumers to dealers, while another sort of
currency , metallic coin, circulates in the retail trade. Although distinct, these two sorts
of currenc y intermi x with each other . Thus gold coin, to a very great extent , circulates
even in larger payments for all the odd sums under 5 Pounds. If tomorrow 4 Pound
notes, or 3 Pound notes, or 2 Pound notes were issued, the gold filling these channels
of circulation would at once be driven out of them, and flow into those channels
where they would be needed from the increase of money wages. Thus the additional
million required by an advance of wages by fifty per cent would be supplied without
the addition of one single Sovereign. The same effect might be produced, without one
additional bank-note, by an additional bill circulation, as was the case in Lancashire
for a very considerable time.
If a general rise in the rate of wages, for example, of 100 per cent, as Citiz en Weston
supposed it to take place in agricultural wages, would produce a great rise in the