One section of the French Legitimists and “Y oung England” exhibited this spectacle.
In pointing out that their mode of exploitation was different to that of the bourgeoisie,
the feudal ists forget that they exploite d under circumstances and conditions that were
quite different and that are now antiquated. In showing that, under their rule, the
modern proletariat  never existed, they forget that the modern bourgeoisie is the
necessary of fspring of their own form of society .
For the rest, so little do they conceal the reactionary character of their criticism that
their chief accusati on against the bourgeois amounts to this, that under the bourgeois
régime a class is being developed which is destined to cut up root and branch the old
order of society .
What they upbraid the bourgeoisie with is not so much that it creates a proletariat as
that it creates a revolutionary  proletariat.
In political practice, therefore, they join in all coercive measures against the working
class; and in ordinary life, despite their high-falutin phrases, they stoop to pick up the
78golden apples dropped from the tree of industry , and to barter truth, love, and honour ,
for traf fic in wool, beetroot-sugar , and potato spirits.
As the parson has ever gone hand in hand with the landlord, so has Clerica l Socialism
with Feudal Socialism. Nothing is easier than to give Christian asceticism a Socialist
tinge. Has not Christianity declaimed against private property , against marriage,
against the State? Has it not preached in the place of these, charity and poverty ,
celibacy and mortification of the flesh, monastic life and Mother Church? Christian
Socialism is but the holy water with which the priest consecrates the heart-b urnings of
the aristocrat.
B. Petty-Bourgeois Socialism
The feudal aristocracy was not the only class that was ruined by the bourgeoisie, not
the only class whose conditions of existence pined and perished in the atmosphere of
modern bourgeois society . The medie val burgesses and the small peasant proprietors
were the precursors of the modern bourgeoisie. In those countries which are but little
developed, industri ally and commercially , these two classes still vegetate side by side
with the rising bour geoisie.
In countr ies where  modern civilisation has become fully developed, a new class of
petty bourgeois has been formed, fluctuating between proletariat and bourgeoisie, and
ever renewing itself as a supplementary part of bourgeois society . The individual
members of this class, however , are being constantly hurled down into the proletariat
by the action of competition, and, as modern industry develops, they even see the
moment approaching when they will completely disappear as an independent section
of moder n society , to be replaced in manufactures, agriculture and commerce, by
overlookers, bailif fs and shopmen.
In countries like France, where the peasants constitute far more than half of the
population, it was natural that writers who sided with the proletariat against the
bourgeoisie should  use, in their criticism of the bourgeois régime , the stand ard of the
peasant and petty bourgeois, and from the standpoint of these intermediate classes,
should take up the cudgels for the working class. Thus arose petty-bour geois
Socialism. Sismondi was the head of this school, not only in France but also in
England.
This school of Socialism dissected with great acuteness the contradicti ons in the
conditions of modern production. It laid bare the hypocritical apologies of
economists. It proved, incontroverti bly, the disastrous effects of machinery and
division of labour; the concentrat ion of capital and land in a few hands;
overproduction and crises; it pointed out the inevitable ruin of the petty bourgeois and
peasant, the misery of the proletariat, the anarchy in production, the crying
inequalities in the distribution of wealth, the industrial war of extermination between
nations, the dissolu tion of old moral bonds, of the old family relations, of the old
nationalities.
In its positive aims, however , this form of Socialism aspires either to restoring the old
means of productio n and of exchange , and with them the old property relations, and
the old society , or to cramping the modern means of production and of exchange
79within the framework of the old property relations that have been, and were bound to
be, exploded by those means. In either case, it is both reactionary and Utopian.
Its last words are: corporate guilds for manufacture; patriarchal relations in
agriculture.
Ultimately , when stubborn historical  facts had dispersed all intoxicating effects of
self-deception, this form of Socialism ended in a miserable hangover .
C. German or “True” Socialism
The Socialist and Communist literature of France, a literature that originated under the
pressure of a bourgeoisie in power , and that was the expressions of the struggle
against this power , was introduced into Germany at a time when the bourgeoisie, in
that country , had just begun its contest with feudal absolutism.
German philosophers, would-be philosophers, and beaux esprits , eagerly seized on
this literature, only forgetting, that when these writings immigrated from France into
Germany , French social conditions had not immigrated along with them.  In contact
with German social conditions, this French literature lost all its immediate practical
significance and assumed a purely literary aspect. Thus, to the German philosophers
of the Eighteenth Century , the demands of the first French Revolution were nothing
more than the demands of “Practical Reason” in general, and the utterance of the will
of the revolutionary French bourgeois ie signified, in their eyes, the laws of pure Will,
of Will as it was bound to be, of true human Will generally .
The work of the German literati  consisted solely in bringing the new French ideas
into harmony with their ancient philo sophical conscience, or rather , in annexing the
French ideas without deserting their own philosophic point of view .
This annexation took place in the same way in which a foreign language is
appropriated, namely , by translation.
It is well known how the monks wrote silly lives of Catholic Saint s over the
manuscripts on which the classical works of ancient heathendom had been written.
The German literati  reversed this process with the profane French literature. They
wrote their philosophical nonsense beneath the French original. For instance, beneath
the French criticism of the economic functions of money , they wrote “Alienation of
Humanity ,” and beneath the French criticism of the bourgeois state they wrote
“Dethronement of the Category of the General,” and so forth.
The intro duction of these philosophical phrases at the back of the French  historical
criticisms, they dubbed “Philosophy of Action,” “True Socialism,” “German Science
of Socialism,” “Philosophical Foundation of Socialism,” and so on.
The French Socialist and Communi st literature was thus completely emasculated.
And, since it ceased in the hands of the German to express the struggle of one class
with the other , he felt conscious of having overcome “French one-sidedne ss” and of
representing, not true requirements, but the requirements of Truth; not the interests of
the proletariat, but the interests of Human Nature, of Man in general, who belongs to
no class, has no reality , who exists only in the misty realm of philosophical fantasy .
80This Germ an socia lism, which took its schoolboy task so seriously and solemnly , and
extolled its poor stock-in-trade in such a mountebank fashion, meanwhile gradually
lost its pedantic innocence.
The fight  of the Germans, and especially of the Prussian bourgeoisie, against feudal
aristocracy and absolute monarchy , in other words, the liberal movement, became
more earnest.
By this, the long-wished for opportunity was offered to “True” Socialism of
confronting the political movement  with the Socialist demands, of hurling the
traditional anathemas against liberali sm, against representative governme nt, against
bourgeois competition, bourgeois freedom of the press, bourgeois legislation,
bourgeois liberty and equality , and of preaching to the masses that they had nothing to
gain, and everything to lose, by this bourgeois movement. German Social ism forgot,
in the nick of time,  that the French criticism, whose silly echo it was, presu pposed the
existence of modern bourgeois society , with its corresponding economic conditions of
existence, and the political constitution adapted thereto, the very things those
attainment was the object of the pending struggle in Germany .
To the absolute governments, with their following of parsons, professors, country
squires, and officials, it served as a welcome scarecrow against the threatening
bourgeoisie.
It was a sweet finish, after the bitter  pills of flogging and bullets, with which these
same governments, just at that time, dosed the German working-class risings.
While this “True” Socialism thus served the government as a weapon for fighting the
German bourgeoisie, it, at the same time, directly represented a reactionary interest,
the interes t of German Philistines. In Germany , the petty-bour geois  class, a relic of the
sixteenth century , and since then constantly cropping up again under the various
forms, is the real social basis of the existing state of things.
To preser ve this class is to preserve  the existing state of things in Germany . The
industrial and political supremacy of the bourgeoisie threatens it with certain
destruction – on the one hand, from the concentration of capital; on the other, from the
rise of a revolutionary proletariat. “True” Socialism appeared to kill these two birds
with one stone. It spread like an epidemic.
The robe of speculative cobwebs, embroidered with flowers of rhetoric, steeped in the
dew of sickly sentiment, this transcendental robe in which the German Socialists