prices of necessaries, and, according to his views, require an additional amount of
currency not to be procured, a general fall in wages  must produce the same effect, on
the same scale, in the opposite direction. Well! All of you know that the years 1858 to
1860 were the most prosperous years  for the cotton industry , and that peculiarly the
year 1860 stands in that respect unrivalled in the annals of commerce, while at the
same time all other branches of industry were most flourishing. The wages of the
cotton operatives and of all the other working men connected with their trade stood, in
1860, higher than ever before. The American crisis came, and those aggre gate wages
were sudd enly reduced to about one-fourth of their former amount. This would have
been in the opposite direction a rise of 400 per cent. If wages rise from five to twenty ,
we say that they rise by 400 per cent; if they fall from twenty to five, we say that they
fall by seventy-five per cent; but the amount of rise in the one and the amount of fall
132in the other case would be the same, namely , fifteen shillings. This, then, was a
sudden change in the rate of wages unprecedented, and at the same time extending
over a number of operatives which, if we count all the operatives not only directly
engaged in but indirectly dependent upon the cotton trade, was larger by one-half than
the number of agricultural labourers. Did the price of wheat fall? It rose from the
annual average of 47 shillings 8d per quarter during the three years of 1858-1860 to
the annual average of 55 shillings 10d per quarter during the three years 1861-1863.
As to the currency , there were coined  in the mint in 1861 8,673,323 Poun ds, against
3,378,792 Pounds in 1860. That is to say, there were coined 5,294,440 Pounds more
in 1861 than in 1860. It is true the bank-note circulation was in 1861 less by
1,319,000 Pounds than in 1860. Take this off. There remains still a surplus of currency
for the year 1861, as compared with the prosperity year, 1860, to the amount of
3,975,440 Pounds, or about 4,000,000 Pounds; but the bullion reserve in the Bank of
England had simul taneously decrease d, not quite to the same, but in an approximating
proportion.
Compare the year 1862 with 1842. Apart from the immense increase in the value and
amount of commod ities circulated, in 1862 the capital paid in regular trans actions for
shares, loans, etc. for the railways in England and Wales amounted alone to
320,000,000 Pound s, a sum that would have appeared fabulous in 1842. Still, the
aggregate amounts in currency in 1862 and 1842 were pretty nearly equal, and
generally you will find a tendency to a progressive diminution of currency in the face
of enormously increasing value, not only of commodities, but of monetary
transactions genera lly. From our friend Weston's standpoint this is an unsolvable
riddle. Looking somewhat deeper into this matter , he would have found that, quite
apart from wages, and supposing them to be fixed, the value and mass of the
commodities to be circulated, and generally the amount of monetary transactions to be
settled, vary daily; that the amount of bank-notes issued varies daily; that the amount
of payments realized without the intervention of any money , by the instrum entality of
bills, cheques, book-credits, clearin g houses, varies daily; that, as far as actual
metallic currency is required, the proportion between the coin in circulation and the
coin and bullion in reserve or sleepi ng in the cellars of banks varies daily; that the
amount of bullion absorbed by the national circulation and the amount being sent
abroad for internat ional circulation vary daily . He would have found that this dogma
of a fixed  currency  is a monstrous error , incompatible with our everyday movement.
He would  have inquired into the laws which enable a currency to adapt itself to
circumstances so continually changin g, instead of turning his misconcep tion of the
laws of currency into an ar gument against a rise of wages.
IV. Su pply and Dem and
Our friend Weston accepts the Latin proverb that "repetitio est mater studiorum ," that
is to say, that repetition is the mother of study , and consequently he repeated his
original dogma again under the new form, that the contraction of currency , resulting
from an enhancem ent of wages, would produce a diminution of capital, and so forth.
Having already dealt with his currency crotchet, I consider it quite useless to enter
upon the imaginary consequences he fancies to flow from his imaginary currency
133mishap. I shall proceed to at once reduce his one and the same dogma , repeated in so
many dif ferent shapes, to its simplest theoretical form.
The uncritical way in which he has treated his subject will become eviden t from one
single remark. He pleads against a rise of wages or against high wages as the result of
such a rise. Now , I ask him, What are high wages and what are low wages? Why
constitute, for example, five shillings  weekly low, and twenty shillings weekly high
wages? If five is low as compared with twenty , twenty is still lower as compared with
two hundred. If a man was to lecture on the thermometer , and comm enced by
declaiming on high and low degrees, he would impart no knowledge whatever . He
must first tell me how the freezing-point is found out, and how the boiling-point, and
how these standard points are settled by natural laws, not by the fancy of the sellers or
makers of thermometers. Now , in regard to wages and profits, Citizen Weston has not
only failed to deduce such standard points from economical laws, but he has not even
felt the necessity to look after them. He satisfied himself with the accepta nce of the
popular slang terms of low and high as something having a fixed meaning, although it
is self-evident that wages can only be said to be high or low as compared with a
standard by which to measure their magnitudes.
He will be unable to tell me why a certain amount of money is given for a certain
amount of labour . If he should answer me, "This was settled by the law of supply and
demand," I should ask him, in the first instance, by what law supply and demand are
themselves regulated. And such an answer would at once put him out of court. The
relations between the supply and demand of labour under go perpetual change, and
with them the market prices of labour. If the demand overshoots the supply wages
rise; if the supply  overshoots the demand wages sink, although it might in such
circumstances be necessary to test the real state of demand and supply by a strike, for
example, or any other method. But if you accept supply and demand as the law
regulating wages, it would be as child ish as useless to declaim against a rise of wages,
because, according to the supreme law you appeal to, a periodical rise of wages is
quite as necessary and legitimate as a periodical fall of wages. If you do not accept
supply and demand as the law regulating wages, I again repeat the question, why a
certain amount of money is given for a certain amount of labour?
But to consider matters more broadly: You would be altogether mistaken in fancying
that the value of labour or any other commodity whatever is ultimately fixed by
supply and demand. Supply and demand regulate nothing but the temporary
fluctuations  of marke t prices. They will explain to you why the market price of a
commodity rises above or sinks below its value , but they can neve r account for the
value  itself. Suppose supply and demand to equilibrate, or, as the economists call it, to
cover each other . Why , the very moment these opposite forces become equal they
paralyze each other , and cease to work in the one or other direction. At the moment
when supply and demand equilibrate each other , and therefore cease to act, the market
price  of a commodity coincides with its real value , with the standard price round
which its market prices oscillate. In inquiring into the nature of that VALUE, we have
therefore nothing at all to do with the temporary effects on market prices  of supply
and demand. The same holds true of wages and of the prices of all other commodities.
134V. Wages and Prices
Reduced to their simplest theoretical expression, all our friend's arguments resolve
themselves into this one dogma: "The price s of commodities are determined or
regulated by wages. "
I might appeal to practical observation to bear witness against this antiq uated and
exploded fallacy . I might tell you that the English factory operative s, miners,
shipbuilders, and so forth, whose labour is relatively high-priced, undersell by the
cheapness of their produce all other nations; while the English agricultura l labourer ,
for example, whose labour is relatively low-priced, is undersold by almost every other
nation because of the dearness of his produce. By comparing article with article in the
same country, and the commodities of different countries, I might show , apart from
some exceptions more apparent than real, that on an average the high-pri ced labour
produces the low-priced, and low priced labour produces the high-priced
commodities. This,  of course, would not prove that the high price of labour in the one,
and its low price in the other instance , are the respective causes of those diametrically
opposed effects, but at all events it would prove that the prices of commodities are not
ruled by the prices  of labour . However , it is quite superfluous for us to employ this
empirical method.
It might, perhaps, be denied that Citizen Weston has put forward the dogma: "The
prices of commodities are determined  or regulated by wages. " In point of fact, he has
never formulated it. He said, on the contrary , that profit and rent also form constituent
parts of the prices of commodities, because it is out of the prices of commodities that
not only the worki ng man's wages, but also the capitalist's profits and the landlord's