encased in eternal natural laws independent of history , at which opportunity  bourgeois
relations are then quietly smuggled in as the inviolable natural laws on which society
in the abstract is founded. This is the more or less conscious purpose of the whole
proceeding. In distribution, by contrast, humanity has allegedly permitted itself to be
considerably more arbitrary . Quite apart from this crude tearing-apart of production
and distribution and of their real relationship, it must be apparent from the outset that,
no matter how differently distribution may have been arranged in different stages of
social development, it must be possible here also, just as with production , to single
out comm on chara cteristics, and just as possible to confound or to extinguish all
historic differences under general human  laws. For example , the slave, the serf and
the wage labourer all receive a quant ity of food which makes it possible for them to
exist as slaves, as serfs, as wage labourers. The conqueror who lives from  tribute, or
106the official who lives from taxes, or the landed proprietor and his rent, or the monk
and his alms, or the Levite and his tithe, all receive a quota of social production,
which is determine d by other laws than that of the slave’ s, etc. The two main points
which all economists cite under this rubric are: (1) property; (2) its protection by
courts, police, etc. To this a very short answer may be given:
to 1. All production  is appropriation of nature on the part of an individual within and
through a specific form of society . In this sense it is a tautology to say that property
(appropriation) is a precondition of production. But it is altogether ridiculous to leap
from that to a specific form of property, e.g. private property . (Which further and
equally presupposes an antithetical form, non-pr operty .) History rather shows
common property (e.g. in lndia, amon g the Slavs, the early Celts, etc.) to be the more
original form, a form which long continues to play a significant role in the shape of
communal property . The question whether wealth develops better in this or another
form of property is still quite beside the point here. But that there can be no
production and hence no society where some form of property does not exist is a
tautology . An appropriation which does not make something into property is a
contradictio in subjecto .
to 2. Protection of acquisitions etc. When these trivialities are reduced to their real
content, they tell more than their preachers know . Namely that every form of
production creates its own legal relations, form of government, etc. In bringing things
which are organically related into an accidental relation, into a merely reflective
connection, they display their crudity and lack of conceptual understandi ng. All the
bourgeois economi sts are aware of is that production can be carried on better under
the modern police than e.g. on the principle of might makes right. They forget only
that this principle is also a legal relation, and that the right of the stronger prevails in
their ‘constitutional republics’  as well, only in another form.
When the social conditions corresponding to a specific stage of production are only
just arisin g, or when they are already  dying out, there are, naturally , disturbances in
production, although to dif ferent degrees and with dif ferent ef fects.
To summarize: There are character istics which all stages of production have in
common, and which are established as general ones by the mind; but the so-called
general preconditions  of all production are nothing more than these abstract moments
with which no real historical stage of production can be grasped.
(2) The General Relation of Production to
Di stribution, Exchange, Consumption
Before going further in the analysis  of production, it is necessary to focus on the
various categories which the economists line up next to it.
The obvious, trite notion: in product ion the members of society appropriate (create,
shape) the products  of nature in accord with human needs; distribution determines the
proportion in which the individual shares in the product; exchange delivers the
particular products  into which the individual desires to convert the portion which
distribution has assigned to him; and finally , in consumption, the products become
107objects of gratification, of individual appropriation. Production creates the objects
which correspond to the given needs; distribution divides them up according to social
laws; exchange further parcels out the already divided shares in accord with
individual needs; and finally , in consumption, the product steps outside this social
movement and becomes a direct object and servant of individual need, and satisfies it
in being consumed. Thus production appears as the point of departure, consumption
as the conclusion, distribution and exchange as the middle, which is however itself
twofold, since distribution is determined by society and exchange by individuals. The
person objectifies himself in production, the thing subjectifies itself in the person; in
distribution, society mediates between production and consumption in the form of
general, dominant determinants; in exchange the two are mediated by the chance
characteristics of the individual.
Distribution determ ines the relation in which products fall to indivi duals (the
amount); exchange determines the production in which the individual demands the
portion allotted to him by distribution.
Thus production, distribution, exchan ge and consumption form a regular syllogism;
production is the generality , distribution and exchange the particularity , and
consumption the singularity in which the whole is joined together . This is admittedly a
coherence, but a shallow one. Production is determined by general natural laws,
distribution by social accident, and the latter may therefore promote production to a
greater or lesser extent; exchange stands between the two as formal social movement;
and the concluding act, consumption, which is conceived not only as a terminal point
but also as an end-in-itself, actually belongs outside economics except in so far as it
reacts in turn upon the point of departure and initiates the whole process anew .
The opponents of the political economists - whether inside or outside its realm - who
accuse them of barbarically tearing apart things which belong together , stand either on
the same ground as they, or beneath them. Nothing is more common than the reproach
that the political economists view production too much as an end in itself, that
distribution is just as important. This accusation is based precisely on the economic
notion that the spheres of distribution  and of production are independent, autonomous
neighbours. Or that these moments were not grasped in their unity . As if this rupture
had made  its way not from reality into the textbooks, but rather from the textbooks
into realit y, and as if the task were the dialectic balancing of concepts, and not the
grasping of real relations!
[Consumption and Production]
(a) Production is also immediately consumption. Twofold consumption, subjective
and objec tive: the individual not only develops his abilities in production, but also
expends them, uses them up in the act of production, just as natural procreation is a
consumption of life forces. Secondly:  consumption of the means of production, which
become worn out through use, and are partly (e.g. in combustion) dissolved into their
elements again. Likewise, consumption of the raw material, which loses its natural
form and composit ion by being used up. The act of production is therefore in all its
moments also an act of consumption. But the economists admit this. Production as
108directly identical with consumption,  and consumption as directly coincident with
production, is termed by them productive consum ption.  This identity of production
and consumption amounts to Spinoza’ s thesis: determinatio est negatio.
But this definition  of productive consumption is advanced only for the purpose of
separating consump tion as identical with production from consumption proper , which
is conceived rather as the destruct ive antithesis to production. Let us therefore
examine consumption proper .
Consumption is also immediately production, just as in nature the consumption of the
elements and chemical substances is the production of the plant. It is clear that in
taking in food, for example, which  is a form of consumption, the human being
produces his own body . But this is also true of every kind of consumption which  in
one way or another produces human beings in some particular aspect. Consumptive
production. But, says economics, this production which is identical with consumption
is secondary , it is derived from the destruction of the prior product. In the former , the
producer objectified himself, in the latter , the object he created personifies itself.
Hence this consumptive production - even though it is an immediate unity of
production and consumption - is essentially different from production proper . The
immediate unity in which production coincides with consumption and consumption
with production leaves their immediate duality intact.
Production, then, is also immediately consumption, consumption is also immediately
production. Each is immediately its opposite. But at the same time a mediating
movement takes place between the two. Production mediates consumption; it creates
the latter ’s materia l; without it, consu mption would lack an object. But consumption
also mediates production, in that it alone creates for the products the subject for whom
they are products. The product only obtains its ‘last finish’  in consumption. A railway
on which no trains run, hence which is not used up, not consumed, is a railway only
dunamei  and not in reality . Without production, no consumption; but also, witho ut