1Selected W orks
of Karl Marx
All texts are taken from the Marxists Internet Archive Marx/Engels library
2Contents
Introduction to Critique of Hegel’ s Philosophy of Right (February 1844)
Theses on Feuerbach   (1845)
The German Ideology , Chapter 1 (1845)
A. Idealism and Materialism
B. The Illusion of the Epoch
C. The Real Basis of Ideology
D. Proletarians and Communism
The Communist Manifesto (February 1848)
I. Bour geois and Proletarians
II. Proletarians and Communists
III. Socialist and Communist Literature
1. Reactionary Socialism
2. Conservative or Bourgeois Socialism
3. Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism
IV. Position of the Communists in Relation to the Various Existing Opposition
Parties
The Paris Commune Address to the International Workingmen’ s Association, May
1871
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (1852) Chapter 1
Grundrisse . Introduction (1857)
(1) Production
(2) The General Relation of Production to Distribution, Exchange, Consumption
(3) The Method of Political Economy
(4) Production. Means of Production and Relations of Production.
Marx, Value, Price and Profit (1865)
Preliminary
I. Production and Wages
II. Production, Wages, Profits
III. Wages and Currency
IV. Supply and Demand
V. Wages and Prices
VI. Value and Labour
VII. Labour Power
VIII. Production of Surplus Value
IX. Value of Labour
X. Profit is Made by Selling a Commodity at its Value
XI. The Different Parts into which Surplus Value is Decomposed
3XII. General Relation of Profits, Wages, and Prices
XIII. Main Cases of Attempts at Raising Wages or Resisting their Fall
XIV. The Struggle Between Capital and Labour and its Results
Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859)
Capital, Volume I (1867)
From the Preface
Chapter 1
§1 The Two Factors of a Commodity: Use-Value and Value
§2 Two-Fold Character of Labour Embodied in Commodities
§3 The Form of Value
§4 The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret thereof
Capital Vol. III. Chapter 2. The Rate of Profit
4Introduction to Critique of
Hegel’s Philosophy of Right
(February 1844)
For Germany , the criticism of religion  has been essenti ally completed, and the
criticism of religion is the prerequisite of all criticism.
The profane  existence of error is compromised as soon as its heavenly oratio pro aris
et focis has been  refuted. Man, who has found only the reflection  of himse lf in the
fantastic reality of heaven, where he sought a superman, will no longer feel disposed
to find the mere appearance  of himself, the non-man, where he seeks and must seek
his true reality .
The foundation of irreligious criticism  is: Man makes religion , religion does not make
man. Religion is, indeed, the self-consciousness and self-esteem of man who has
either not yet won through to himself, or has already lost himself again. But man is no
abstract being squatting outside the world. Man is the world of man – state, society .
This state and this society produce religion, which is an inverted consciousness of the
world , because  they are an inverted world. Religion  is the general theory of this
world, its encyclopaedic compendium , its logic in popular form, its spiritual point
d’honneur , its enthusiasm, its moral sanction, its solemn complement, and its
universal basis of consolation and justification. It is the fantastic realizatio n of the
human essence since the human essence  has not acquired any true reality . The struggle
against religion is, therefore, indirectl y the struggle against that world  whose spiritual
aroma is religion.
Religious  suffering is, at one and the same time, the expression  of real suffering and a
protest  against real suffering. Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart
of a heartless world, and the soul of soulless conditions. It is the opium  of the people.
The abolition of religion as the illusory  happiness of the people is the demand for
their real happiness. To call on them to give up their illusions about their condition is
to call on them to give up a condition that requir es illusions . The criticism of religion
is, therefore, in embryo, the criticism of that vale of tears  of which religion is the halo.
Criticism has plucked the imaginary flowers on the chain not in order that man shall
continue to bear that chain without fantasy or consolation, but so that he shall throw
off the chain and pluck the living flower. The criticism of religion disillusions man, so
that he will think, act, and fashion his reality like a man who has discarded his
illusions and regained his senses, so that he will move around himself as his own true
Sun. Religion is only the illusory Sun which revolves around man as long as he does
not revolve around himself.
It is, therefore, the task of history , once the other -world of truth  has vanished, to
establish the truth of this world . It is the immediate task of philosophy , which is in the
5service of history , to unmask self-estrangement in its unholy forms  once the holy form
of human  self-estrangement has been unmasked. Thus, the criticism of Heaven turns
into the criticism of Earth, the criticism of religion  into the criticism of law, and the
criticism of theology  into the criticism of politics .
The follo wing exposition – a contrib ution to this undertaking – concern s itself not
directly with the original but with a copy , with the German philosophy  of the state and
of law . The only reason for this is that it is concerned with Germany .
If we were to begin with the German status quo itself, the result – even if we were to
do it in the only appropriate way, i.e., negatively – would still be an anachr onism .
Even the negation of our present political situation is a dusty fact in the historical junk
room of modern nations. If I negate powdered pigtails, I am still left with unpowdered
pigtails. If I negate the situation in Germany in 1843, then according to the French
calendar I have barely reached 1789, much less the vital centre of our present age.
Indeed, German history prides itself on having travelled a road which no other nation
in the whole of history has ever trave lled before, or ever will again. We have shared
the restor ations of modern nations without ever having shared their revolutions. We
have been  restored, firstly , because other nations dared to make revolutions, and,
secondly , because other nations suffered counter -revolutions; on the one hand,
because our masters were afraid, and, on the other , because they were not afraid. With
our shepherds to the fore, we only once kept company with freedom, on the day of its
internment.
One school of thought that legitim izes the infamy of today with the infamy of
yesterday , a school that stigmatizes every cry of the serf against the knout as mere
rebelliousness once  the knout has aged a little and acquired a hereditary significance
and a history , a school to which history shows nothing but its a posteriori , as did the
God of Israel to his servant Moses, the historical school of law – this school would
have invented German history were it not itself an invention of that history . A
Shylock, but a cringing Shylock, that swears by its bond, its historica l bond, its
Christian-Germanic bond, for every pound of flesh cut from the heart of the people.
Good-natured enthusiasts, Germanomaniacs by extraction and free-thinkers by
reflexion, on the contrary , seek our history of freedom beyond our history in the
ancient Teutonic forests. But, what difference is there between the history of our
freedom and the history of the boar’s freedom if it can be found only in the forests?
Besides, it is common knowledge that the forest echoes back what you shout into it.
So peace to the ancient Teutonic forests!
War on the German state of affairs! By all means! They are below the level of history ,
they are beneath any criticism , but they are still an object of criticism like the criminal
who is below the level of humanity but still an object for the executioner . In the
struggle against that state of affairs, criticism is no passion of the head, it is the head
of passion . It is not a lancet, it is a weapon. Its object is its enemy , which it wants not
to refute but to exterminate . For the spirit of that state of affairs is refuted. In itself, it
is no object worthy of thought , it is an existence which is as despicable as it is
despised. Criticism  does not need to make things clear to itself as regards this object,
for it has already settled accounts with it. It no longer assumes the quality of an end-
6in-itself , but only of a means . Its essential pathos is indignation , its essential work is
denunciation .
It is a case of describing the dull reciprocal pressure of all social spheres one on
another , a general inactive ill-humour , a limitedness which recognizes itself as much
as it mistakes itself, within the frame of government system which, living on the
preservation of all wretchedness, is itself nothing but wretchedness in office .
What a sight! This infinitely proceeding division of society into the most manifold
races opposed to one another by petty antipathies, uneasy consciences, and brutal
mediocrity , and which, precisely because of their reciprocal ambiguous and distrustful
attitude, are all, without exception although with various formalities, treated by their
rulers  as conceded existenc es. And they must recognize and acknowledge as a
concession of heaven the very fact that they are master ed, ruled, possessed ! And, on
the other side, are the rulers themselves, whose greatness is in inverse proportion to
their number!
Criticism dealing with this content is criticism in a hand-to-hand  fight, and in such a
fight the point is not whether the oppo nent is a noble, equal, interesting  opponent, the
point is to strike  him. The point is not to let the Germans have a minute for self-
deception and resignation. The actual pressure must be made more pressing by adding