The highest point reached by contem plative materialism, that is, materialism which
does not comprehend sensuousness as practical activity , is the contemplatio n of single
individuals and of civil society .
10
The standpoint of the old materialism is civil society; the standpoint of the new is
human society or social humanity .
11
Philosophers have hitherto only interpreted the world in various ways; the point is to
change it.
 
16“The German Ideology” Chapter 1 (1845)
A. Idealism and Materialism
The Illusions of German Ideology
As we hear from German ideologists, Germany has in the last few years gone through
an unpara lleled revolution. The decomposition of the Hegelian philosophy , which
began with Strauss, has developed into a universal ferment into which all the ‘powers
of the past’ are swept. In the general chaos mighty empires have arisen only to meet
with immediate doom, heroes have emerged momentarily only to be hurled  back into
obscurity by bolder and stronger rivals. It was a revolution beside which the French
Revolution was child’ s play, a world struggle beside which the struggles of the
Diadochi [successors of Alexander the Great]  appear insignificant. Principles ouste d
one another , heroes of the mind overt hrew each other with unheard-of rapid ity, and in
the three years 1842-45 more of the past was swept away in Germany than at other
times in three centuries.
All this is supposed to have taken place in the realm of pure thought.
Certainly it is an interesting event we are dealing with: the putrescence of the absolute
spirit. When the last spark of its life had failed, the various components of this caput
mortuum  began to decomp ose, entered into new combinations and formed new
substances. The industrialists of philosophy , who till then had lived on the
exploitation of the absolute spirit, now seized upon the new combinations. Each with
all possib le zeal set about retailing his apportioned share. This naturally gave rise to
competition, which , to start with, was carried on in moderately staid bourgeois
fashion. Later when the German market was glutted, and the commodity in spite of all
efforts found no response in the world market, the business was spoiled in the usual
German manner by fabricated and fictitious production, deterioration in quality ,
adulteration of the raw materials, falsification of labels, fictitious purchases, bill-
jobbing and a credit system devoid of any real basis. The competition turned into a
bitter struggle, which is now being extolled and interpreted to us as a revolution of
world significance, the begetter of the most prodigious results and achievements.
If we wish to rate at its true value this philosophic charlatanry , which awakens even in
the breast of the honest German citizen a glow of national pride, if we wish to bring
out clearly the pettiness, the parochial narrowness of this whole Young-Hegelian
movement and in particular the tragicomic contrast between the illusions of these
heroes about their achievements and the actual achievements themselves, we must
look at the whole spectacle from a standpoint beyond the frontiers of Germany .
[In the first version of the clean copy there follows a passage, which is crossed out:]
We preface therefore the specific criticism of individual representativ es of this
movement with a few general observations, elucidating the ideological premises
common to all of them. These remarks will suffice to indicate the standp oint of our
17criticism insofar as it is required for the understanding and the motivat ion of the
subsequent individual criticisms. We oppose these remarks |p. 3| to Feuerbach in
particular because he is the only one who has at least made some progress and whose
works can be examined de bonne foi.
1. Ideology in General, and Especially German Philosophy
A. We know only a single science, the science of history . One can look at history from
two sides and divid e it into the history of nature and the history of men. The two sides
are, however , inseparable; the history of nature and the history of men are dependent
on each other so long as men exist. The history of nature, called natural science, does
not concern us here; but we will have to examine the history of men, since almost the
whole ideology amounts either to a distorted conception of this history or to a
complete abstraction from it. Ideology is itself only one of the aspects of this history .
[There follows a passage dealing with the premises of the materialist conception of
history . It is not crossed out and in this volume it is reproduced as Section  2; see pp.
31-32]
Ideology in General, German Ideology in Particular
German criticism has, right up to its latest efforts, never quitted the realm of
philosophy . Far from examining its general philosophic premises, the whole body of
its inquiries has actually sprung from  the soil of a definite philosophical system, that
of Hegel. Not only in their answers but in their very questions there was a
mystification. This dependence on Hegel is the reason why not one of these modern
critics has even attempted a comprehe nsive criticism of the Hegelian system , however
much each professes to have advance d beyond Hegel. Their polemics against Hegel
and against one another are confined to this - each extracts one side of the Hegelian
system and turns this against the whole system as well as against the sides extracted
by the others. To begin with they extracted pure unfalsified Hegelian categories such
as ‘substa nce’ and ‘self-consciousne ss,’ later they desecrated these categ ories with
more secular names such as species ‘the Unique,’  ‘Man,’  etc.
The entire body of German philosophical criticism from Strauss to Stirner is confined
to criticis m of religious conceptions . [The follo wing passage is crossed out in the
manuscript:] claim ing to be the absolute redeemer of the world from all evil. Religion
was conti nually regarded and treated as the arch-enemy , as the ultimate cause of all
relations repugnant to these philosophers.  The critics started from real religio n and
actual theology . What religious consc iousness and a religious conception really meant
was deter mined variously as they went along. Their advance consisted in subsuming
the allege dly dominant metaphysical, political, juridical, moral and other conceptions
under the class of religious or theological conceptions; and similarly in pronouncing
political, juridical, moral consciousness as religious or theological, and the political,
juridical, moral man - ‘man’  in the last resort - as religious. The dominance of religion
was taken for granted. Gradually every dominant relationship was pronounced a
religious relationship and transformed into a cult, a cult of law, a cult of the State, etc.
On all sides it was only a question of dogmas and belief in dogmas. The world was
18sanctified to an ever-increasing extent till at last our venerable Saint Max was able to
canonise it en bloc  and thus dispose of it once for all.
The Old Hegelians had comprehended everything as soon as it was reduced to an
Hegelian logical category . The Young  Hegelians criticised everything by attributing to
it religious conceptions or by pronouncing it a theological matter . The Young
Hegelians are in agreement with the Old Hegelians in their belief in the rule of
religion, of concepts, of a universal principle in the existing world. Only , the one party
attacks this dominion as usurpation, while the other extols it as legitimate.
Since the Young Hegelians consider conceptions, thoughts, ideas, in fact all the
products of consciousness, to which they attribute an independent existence, as the
real chains of men (just as the Old Hegelians declared them the true bonds  of human
society) it is evident that the Young Hegelians have to fight only against these
illusions of consciousness. Since, according to their fantasy , the relationships of men,
all their doings, their chains and their limitations are products of their consciousness,
the Young  Hegelia ns logically put to men the moral postulate of exchanging their
present consciousn ess for human, critical or egoistic consciousness, and thus of
removing their limitations. This demand to change consciousness amounts to a
demand to interpret reality in another way, i.e. to recognise it by means of another
interpretation. The Young-Hegelian ideologists, in spite of their alleged ly ‘world-
shattering’  stateme nts, are the staunch est conservatives. The most recent of them have
found the correct expression for their activity when they declare they are only fighting
against ‘phrases.’  They forget, however , that to these phrases they themselves are only
opposing other phrases, and that they are in no way combating the real existing world
when they are merely combating the phrases of this world. The only results which this
philosophic criticis m could achieve were a few (and at that thoroughly one-sided)
elucidations of Christianity from the point of view of religious history; all the rest of
their assertions are only further embellishments of their claim to have furnished, in
these unimportant elucidations, discoveries of universal importance.
It has not occurred  to any one of these philosophers to inquire into the connection of
German philosophy with German reality , the relation of their criticism to their own
material surroundings.
First Premises of Materialist Method
The premises from which we begin are not arbitrary ones, not dogma s, but real
premises from which abstraction can only be made in the imagination. They are the
real individuals, their activity and the material conditions under which they live, both
those which they find already existing and those produced by their activ ity. These
premises can thus be verified in a purely empirical way .
The first premise of all human histo ry is, of course, the existence of living human