instruments of production are to be exploited in common, and, naturally , can come to
no other conclusion that the lot of being common to all will likewise fall to the
women.
He has not even a suspicion that the real point aimed at is to do away with the status
of women as mere instruments of production.
For the rest, nothin g is more ridiculous than the virtuous indignation of our bourgeois
at the community of women which, they pretend, is to be openly and officially
established by the Communists. The Communists have no need to introduce
community of women; it has existed almost from time immemorial.
Our bourgeois, not content with having wives and daughters of their proletarians at
their disposal, not to speak of common prostitutes, take the greatest pleasure in
seducing each other ’s wives.
Bour geois marriage is, in reality , a system of wives in common and thus, at the most,
what the Communists might possib ly be reproached with is that they desire to
introduce, in substitution for a hypocritically concealed, an openly legalised
community of women. For the rest, it is self-evident that the abolition of the present
system of production must bring with it the abolition of the community of women
springing from that system, i.e., of prostitution both public and private.
The Communists are further reproa ched with desiring to abolish countries and
nationality .
The working men have no country . We cannot take from them what they have not got.
Since the proletariat must first of all acquire political supremacy , must rise to be the
leading class of the nation, must constitute itself the nation, it is so far, itself national,
though not in the bour geois sense of the word.
National differenc es and antagonism between peoples are daily more and more
vanishing, owing to the development of the bourgeoisie, to freedom of commerce, to
the world  market, to uniformity in the mode of production and in the condit ions of life
corresponding thereto.
The supremacy of the proletariat will cause them to vanish still faster . United action,
of the leading civilised countries at least, is one of the first conditio ns for the
emancipation of the proletariat.
In propor tion as the exploitation of one individual by another will also be put an end
to, the exploitation of one nation by another will also be put an end to. In proportion
75as the antagonism between classes within the nation vanishes, the hostility of one
nation to another will come to an end.
The charges against Communism made from a religious, a philosophical and,
generally , from an ideological standpoint, are not deserving of serious examination.
Does it require deep intuition to comp rehend that man’ s ideas, views, and conception,
in one word, man’ s consciousness, changes with every change in the condi tions of his
material existence, in his social relations and in his social life?
What else does the history of ideas prove, than that intellectual production changes its
character in proportion as material production is changed? The ruling ideas of each
age have ever been the ideas of its ruling class.
When people speak of the ideas that revolutionise society , they do but express that
fact that within the old society the elements of a new one have been created, and that
the disso lution of the old ideas keeps even pace with the dissolution of the old
conditions of existence.
When the ancient world was in its last throes, the ancient religions were overcome by
Christianity . When Christian ideas succumbed in the 18th century to rationalist ideas,
feudal society fought its death battle with the then revolutionary bourgeoisie. The
ideas of religious liberty and freedom of conscience merely gave expression to the
sway of free competition within the domain of knowledge.
“Undoubtedly ,” it will be said, “religious, moral, philosophical, and juridical ideas
have been modified in the course of historical development. But religion , morality ,
philosophy , political science, and law , constantly survived this change.”
“There are, besides, eternal truths, such as Freedom, Justice, etc., that are common to
all states of society . But Communism abolishes eternal truths, it abolishes all religion,
and all morality , instead of constituting them on a new basis; it therefore acts in
contradiction to all past historical experience.”
What does this accusation reduce itself to? The history of all past society has
consisted in the development of class antagonisms, antagonisms that assumed
different forms at dif ferent epochs.
But whatever form they may have taken, one fact is common to all past ages, viz., the
exploitation of one part of society by the other . No wonder , then, that the social
consciousness of past ages, despite all the multiplicity and variety it displa ys, moves
within certain common forms, or general ideas, which cannot completely vanish
except with the total disappearance of class antagonisms.
The Communist revolution is the most radical rupture with traditional property
relations; no wonder that its development involved the most radical rupture with
traditional ideas.
But let us have done with the bour geois objections to Communism.
We have seen above, that the first step in the revolution by the working class is to
raise the proletariat to the position of ruling class to win the battle of democracy .
The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degree, all capit al from the
bourgeoisie, to centralise all instruments of production in the hands of the State, i.e.,
76of the proletariat organised as the ruling class; and to increase the total productive
forces as rapidly as possible.
Of course , in the beginning, this cannot be effected except by means of despotic
inroads on the rights of property , and on the conditions of bourgeois production; by
means of measures , therefore, which appear economically insuf ficient and untenable,
but which, in the course of the movement, outstrip themselves, necessitate further
inroads upon the old social order , and are unavoid able as a means of entirely
revolutionising the mode of production.
These measures will, of course, be dif ferent in dif ferent countries.
Nevertheless, in most advanced countries, the following will be pretty generally
applicable.
1. Aboliti on of property in land and application of all rents of land to
public purposes.
2. A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.
3. Abolition of all rights of inheritance.
4. Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and rebels.
5. Centra lisation of credit in the hands of the state, by means of a
national bank with State capital and an exclusive monopoly .
6. Centralisation of the means of communication and transport in the
hands of the State.
7. Extens ion of factories and instrum ents of production owned by the
State; the bringing into cultivation of waste-lands, and the improvement
of the soil generally in accordance with a common plan.
8. Equal liability of all to work. Establishment of industrial armies,
especially for agriculture.
9. Combi nation of agriculture with manufacturing industries; gradual
abolition of all the distinction betw een town and country by a more
equable distribution of the populace over the country .
10. Free education for all children  in public schools. Abolition of
children’ s factory labour in its presen t form. Combination of education
with industrial production, &c, &c.
When, in the course of development, class distinctions have disappeare d, and all
production has been concentrated in the hands of a vast association of the whole
nation, the public power will lose its political character . Political power , properly so
called, is merely the organised power of one class for oppressing another . If the
proletariat during its contest with the bourgeoisie is compelled, by the force of
circumstances, to organise itself as a class, if, by means of a revolution, it makes itself
the ruling  class, and, as such, sweeps away by force the old conditions of production,
then it will, along  with these condi tions, have swept away the conditions for the
existence of class antagonisms and of classes generally , and will thereby have
abolished its own supremacy as a class.
77In place of the old bourgeois society , with its classes and class antagonism s, we shall
have an association, in which the free development of each is the condit ion for the
free development of all.
III. Socialist and Communist Literature
1. Rea cti onary So cialism
A. Feudal Socialism
Owing to their historical position, it became the vocation of the aristo cracies of
France and England to write pamphlets against modern bourgeois society. In the
French Revolution of July 1830, and in the English reform agitation, these
aristocracies again succumbed to the hateful upstart. Thenceforth, a serious political
struggle was altoge ther out of the question. A literary battle alone remained possible.
But even in the domain of literature the old cries of the restoration period had become
impossible.
In order to arouse sympathy , the aristocracy was obliged to lose sight, apparently , of
its own interests, and to formulate their indictment against the bourgeoisie in the
interest of the exploited working class alone. Thus, the aristocracy took their revenge
by singing lampoons on their new masters and whispering in his ears sinister
prophesies of coming catastrophe.
In this way arose feudal Socialism: half lamentation, half lampoon; half an echo of the
past, half menace of the future; at times, by its bitter , witty and incisive  criticism,
striking the bourgeoisie to the very heart’ s core; but always ludicrous in its effect,
through total incapacity to comprehend the march of modern history .
The aristocracy , in order to rally the people to them, waved the proletaria n alms-bag
in front for a banner . But the people, so often as it joined them, saw on their
hindquarters the old feudal coats of arms, and deserted with loud and irreverent
laughter .