labour , of so many days' or so many weeks' labour respectively fixed in them. In thus
determining the relative values of gold and corn, do we refer in any way whatever to
the wages  of the agricultura l labourer and the miner? Not a bit. We leave it quite
indeterminate  how their day's or their week's labour was paid, or even whether wages
labour was employed at all. If it was, wages may have been very unequal. The
labourer whose labour is realized in the quarter of wheat may receive two bushels
only, and the labourer employed in mining may receive one-half of the ounce of gold.
Or, suppo sing their wages to be equal, they may deviate in all possible proportions
from the values of the commodities produced by them. They may amou nt to one-
fourth, one-fifth, or any other propor tional part of the one quarter of corn or the one
ounce of gold. Their wages  can, of course, not exceed , not be more than the values of
the commodities they produced, but they can be less in every possible degree. Their
wages  will be limited  by the values  of the products, but the values of their products
will not be limited by the wages. And above all, the values, the relative values of corn
and gold, for exam ple, will have been  settled without any regard whatever to the value
of the labour employed, that is to say, to wages . To determine the values of
commodities by the relative quantities of labour fixed in them , is, there fore, a thing
quite different from  the tautological method of determining the values of commodities
by the value of labour, or by wages . This point, howev er, will be further elucidated in
the progress of our inquiry .
In calcula ting the exchangeable value  of a commodity we must add to the quantity of
labour previously  worked up in the raw material of the commodity , and the labour
bestowed on the implements, tools, machinery , and buildings, with which such labour
is assiste d. For example, the value of a certain amount of cotton yarn is the
crystallization of the quantity of labour added to the cotton during the spinning
process, the quantity of labour previo usly realized in the cotton itself, the quantity of
labour realized in the coal, oil, and other auxiliary substances used, the quantity of
labour fixed in the steam-engine, the spindles, the factory building, and so forth.
Instruments of production properly so-called, such as tools, machinery , buildings,
serve again and again for longer or shorter period during repeated processes of
production. If they were used up at once, like the raw material, their whole value
would at once be transferred to the commodities they assist in producing. But as a
138spindle, for examp le, is but gradually used up, an average calculation is made, based
upon the average time it lasts, and its average waste or wear and tear during a certain
period, say a day. In this way we calculate how much of the value of the spindle is
transferred to the yarn daily spin, and how much, therefore, of the total amount of
labour realized in a pound of yarn, for example, is due to the quantity  of labour
previously realized  in the spindle. For our present purpose it is not necessary to dwell
any longer upon this point.
It might seem that if the value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of labour
bestowed upon its production , the lazier a man, or the clumsier a man, the more
valuable his comm odity , because the greater the time of labour required for finishing
the commodity . This, however , would be a sad mistake. You will recollect that I used
the word "social  labour ," and many points are involved in this qualification of
"social ." In saying that the value of a commodity is determined by the quantity of
labour  worked up or crystalized in it, we mean the quanti ty of labour necessary  for its
production in a given state of socie ty, under certain social average conditions of
production, with a given social average intensity , and average skill of the labour
employed. When, in England, the power-loom came to compete with the hand-loom,
only half the former time of labour was wanted to convert a given amount of yarn into
a yard of cotton or cloth. The poor hand-loom weaver now worked seventeen or
eighteen hours daily , instead of the nine or the hours he had worked before. Still the
product of twenty hours of his labour represented now only ten social hours  of labour ,
or ten hours of labour socially necessary for the conversion of a certain amount of
yarn into textile stuffs. His product of twenty hours had, therefore, no more value than
his former product of ten hours.
If then the quantity of socially necessary labour realized in commoditie s regulates
their exch angeable values, every increase in the quantity of labour wanted for the
production of a commodity must augment its value, as every diminution must lower
it.
If the respective quantities of labour necessary for the production of the respective
commodities remained constant, their relative values also would be constan t. But such
is not the case. The quantity of labou r necessary for the production of a commodity
changes continuously with the changes in the productive powers of labour , the more
produce is finished  in a given time of labour; and the smaller the productive powers of
labour , the less produce is finished in the same time. If, for example, in the progress of
population it should become necessary to cultivate less fertile soils, the same amount
of produc e would be only attainable  by a greater amount of labour spent, and the
value of agricultural produce would consequently rise. On the other hand, if, with the
modern means of production, a single spinner converts into yarn, during one working
day, many  thousand times the amoun t of cotton which he could have spun  during the
same time with the spinning wheel, it is evident that every single pound of cotton will
absorb many thousand times less of spinning labour than it did before, and
consequently , the value added by spinning to every single pound of cotton will be a
thousand times less than before. The value of yarn will sink accordingly .
139Apart from the different natural energies and acquired working abilities of different
peoples, the productive powers of labour must principally depend: -
Firstly . Upon the natural  conditions of labour, such as fertility  of soil, mines, and so
forth.
Secondly . Upon the progressive impr ovement of the social powers of labour , such as
are derived from production on a grand scale, concentration of capital and
combination of labour , subdivision of labour , machinery , improved methods,
appliance of chemical and other natural agencies, shortening of time and space by
means of communication and transport, and every other contrivance by which science
presses natural agencies into the service of labour , and by which the social or co-
operative character of labour is developed. The greater the productive powers of
labour , the less labour is bestowed upon a given amount of produce; hence the smaller
the value  of the produce. The smaller the productive powers of labour , the more
labour is bestowed upon the same amount of produce; hence the greater its value. As a
general law we may , therefore, set it down that:
The value s of commodities are directly as the times of labour employed
in their production, and are inversely as the productive powers of the
labour employed.
Having till now only spoken of value , I shall add a few words about price , which is a
peculiar from assumed by value.
Price, taken by itself, is nothing but the monetary expressio n of value . The values of
all commodities of the country , for example, are expressed in gold prices, while on the
Continent they are mainly expressed in silver prices. The value of gold or silver , like
that of all other commodities is regulated by the quantity of labour necessary for
getting them. You exchange a certain  amount of your national products, in which a
certain amount of your national labour is crystallized, for the produce of the gold and
silver producing countries, in which a certain quantity of their  labour is crystalliz ed. It
is in this way, in fact by barter , that you learn to express in gold and silver  the values
of all commodities , that is the respective quantities of labour bestowed upon them.
Looking somewhat closer into the monetary expression of value , or what comes to the
same, the conversion of value into price, you will find that it is a process by which
you give to the values  of all commodities an independent  and homogeneous form , or
by which you express them as quantities of equal social labour . So far as it is but the
monetary expressio n of value, price has been called natural price by Adam Smith,
"prix necessair e" by the French Physiocrats. What then is the relation between value
and market prices, or between natural prices and market prices? You all know that the
market price  is the same  for all commodities of the same kind, however the conditions
of produc tion may differ for the individual producers. The market price  expresses
only the average amount of social labour  necessary , under the average conditions of
production, to supply the market with a certain mass of a certain article. It is
calculated upon the whole lot of a commodity of a certain description.
So far the market price of a commodity coincides with its value . On the other hand ,
the oscillations of market prices, rising now over, sinking now under the value or
140natural price, depe nd upon the fluctu ations of supply and demand. The deviations of
market prices from values are continual, but as Adam Smith says:
"The natural price is the central price to which the prices of
commodities are continually gravitating. Dif ferent accidents may
sometimes keep them suspended a good deal above it, and sometimes
force them down even somewhat below it. But whatever may be the
obstacles which hinder them from settling in this center of repose and