A similar comparison would prove that not only the market rates  of profit change, but
its average  rates.
But as to profits, there exists no law which determines their minimum . We cannot say
what is the ultimate limit of their decrease. And why cannot we fix that limit?
Because, although we can fix the minimum  of wages, we cannot fix their maximum .
We can only say that, the limits of the working day being given, the maximum of
profit corresponds to the physical minimum of wages ; and that wages being given, the
maximum of profit corresponds to such a prolongation of the working day as is
compatible with the physical forces of the labourer . The maximum of profit is
therefore limited by the physical minimum of wages and the physical maximum of the
working day. It is evident that betwe en the two limits of the maximum rate of profit
and immense scale of variations is possible. The fixation of its actual degree is only
settled by the conti nuous struggle between capital and labour , the capitalist constantly
tending to reduce wages to their phys ical minimum, and to extend the working day to
its physical maximum, while the working man constantly presses in the opposite
direction.
The matter resolves itself into a question of the respective powers of the combatants.
2. As to the limitation of the working day in England, as in all other countries, it has
never been settled except by legislative interfer ence. Without  the working men's
continuous pressur e from without that interference would never have taken place. But
at all events, the result was not to be attained by private settlement between the
working men and the capitalists. This very necessity of general political action
affords the proof that in its merely economical action capital is the stronger side.
As to the limits  of the value of labour , its actua l settlement always depend s upon
supply and deman d, I mean the demand for labour on the part of capital, and the
supply of labour by the working men. In colonial countries the law of supply and
demand favours the working man. Hence the relatively high standard of wages in the
United States. Capital may there try its utmost. It cannot prevent the labour market
from being continuously emptied by the continuous conversion of wages labourers
into indep endent, self-sustaining peasants. The position of a wages labourer is for a
very large part of the American people but a probational state, which they are sure to
leave within a longer or shorter term. To mend this colonial state of things the paternal
British Governmen t accepted for some time what is called the modern colonization
155theory , which consists in putting an artificial high price upon colonial land,  in order to
prevent the too quick conversion of the wages labourer into the independent peasant.
But let us now come to old civilized  countries, in which capital dominee rs over the
whole process of production. Take, for example, the rise in England of agricultural
wages from 1849 to 1859. What was its consequence? The farmers could not, as our
friend Weston would have advised them, raise the value of wheat, nor even  its market
prices. They had, on the contrary , to submit to their fall. But during these eleven years
they intro duced machinery of all sorts, adopted more scientific methods, converted
part of arable land into pasture, increased the size of farms, and with this the scale of
production, and by these and other processes diminishing the demand for labour by
increasing its productive power , made the agricultural population again relatively
redundant. This is the general method in which a reaction, quicker or slower , of
capital against a rise of wages takes place in old, settled countries. Ricardo  has justly
remarked that machinery is in constan t competition with labour , and can often be only
introduced when the price of labour has reached a certain height, but the appliance of
machinery is but one of the many methods for increasing the productive powers of
labour . The very same development which makes common labour relatively redundant
simplifies, on the other hand, skilled labour , and thus depreciates it.
The same law obtains in another form. With the development of the productive
powers of labour the accumulation of capital will be accelerated, even despite a
relatively high rate of wages. Hence, one might infer, as Adam Smith, in whose days
modern industry was still in its infancy , did infer, that the accelerated accumulation of
capital must turn the balance in favour of the working man, by securing a growing
demand for his labour . From this same standpoint many contemporary writers have
wondered that English capital having grown in that last twenty years so much quicker
than English population, wages should not have been more enha nced. But
simultaneously with the progress of accumulation there takes place a progressive
change in the composition of capital . That part of the aggregate capital which consists
of fixed capital, machinery , raw materials, means of production in all possible forms,
progressively increases as compared with the other part of capital, which is laid out in
wages or in the purchase of labour . This law has been stated in a more or less accurate
manner by Mr. Barton, Ricardo, Sismondi, Professor Richard Jones, Professor
Ramsey , Cherbuilliez, and others.
If the proportion of these two elements of capital was originally one to one, it will, in
the progress of industry , become five to one, and so forth. If of a total capital of 600,
300 is laid out in instruments, raw materials, and so forth, and 300 in wages, the total
capital wants only to be doubled to create a demand for 600 working men instead of
for 300. But if of a capital of 600, 500 is laid out in machinery , materials, and so forth
and 100 only in wages, the same capital must increase from 600 to 3,600 in order to
create a demand for 600 workmen instead of 300. In the progress of industry the
demand for labour keeps, therefore, no pace with the accumulation of capital. It will
still incre ase, but increase in a constantly diminishing ratio as compared with the
increase of capital.
156These few hints will suffice to show  that the very development of modern industry
must progressively turn the scale in favour of the capitalist against the working man,
and that consequently the general tendency of capitalistic production is not to raise,
but to sink the average standard of wages, or to push the value of labour  more or less
to its minimum limit. Such being the tendency of things  in this system, is this saying
that the working class ought to renounce their resistance against the encroachments of
capital, and abando n their attempts at making the best of the occasional chances for
their temp orary improvement? If they did, they would be degraded to one level mass
of broken wretches past salvation. I think I have shown that their strugg les for the
standard of wages are incidents inseparable from the whole wages system, that in 99
cases out of 100 their efforts at raising  wages are only efforts at maintaining the given
value of labour , and that the necessi ty of debating their price with the capitalist is
inherent to their condition of having to sell themselves as commodities. By cowardly
giving way in their everyday conflict with capital, they would certainly disqualify
themselves for the initiating of any lar ger movement.
At the same time, and quite apart from the general servitude involved in the wages
system, the workin g class ought not to exaggerate to themselves the ultimate working
of these everyday struggles. They ought not to forget that they are fighting with
effects, but not with the causes of those effects; that they are retarding the downward
movement, but not changing its direction; that they are applying palliatives, not curing
the malady . They ought, therefore , not to be exclusively absorbed in these
unavoidable guerrilla fights incessantly springing up from the never ceasing
encroachments of capital or changes  of the market. They ought to under stand that,
with all the miseries it imposes upon them, the present system simultaneously
engenders the material conditions  and the social forms  necessary for an economical
reconstruction of society . Instead of the conservative  motto, "A fair day's wage for a
fair day's work! " they ought to inscribe on their bann er the revolutionary  watc hword,
"Abolition of the wages system! "
After this very long and, I fear, tedio us exposition, which I was obliged to enter into
to do some justice to the subject matter, I shall conclude by proposing the following
resolutions:
Firstly . A general rise in the rate of wages would result in a fall of the general rate of
profit, but, broadly speaking, not af fect the prices of commodities.
Secondly . The gene ral tendency of capitalist production is not to raise, but to sink the
average standard of wages.
Thirdly. Trades Unions work well as centers of resistance against the encroachments
of capital. They fail partially from an injudicious use of their power . The fail generally
from limiting themselves to a guerrill a war against the effects of the existi ng system,
instead of simultan eously trying to change it, instead of using their organized forces
as a lever for the final emancipation of the working class that is to say the ultimate
abolition of the wages system.
157Preface to A Contribution to the Critique
of Political Economy (1859)
I examine  the system of bourgeois economy in the following order: capital, landed
property , wage-labour; the State, foreign trade, world market.
The econ omic conditions of existence of the three great classes into which modern
bourgeois society is divided are analysed under the first three headings; the
interconnection of the other three headings is self-evident. The first part of the first
book, dealing with Capital, comprise s the following chapters: 1. The commodity , 2.