determines the specific forms of distribution, i.e. the pattern of participation in
distribution. It is altogether an illusi on to posit land in production, ground rend in
distribution, etc.
Thus, economists such as Ricardo, who are the most frequently accused of focusing
on produc tion alone, have defined distribution as the exclusive object of economics,
because they instinctively conceived the forms of distribution as the most specific
expression into which the agents of production of a given society are cast.
To the single individual, of course, distribution appears as a social law which
determines his position within the system of production within which he produces,
and which therefore precedes production. The individual comes into the world
possessing neither capital nor land. Social distribution assigns him at birth to wage
labour . But this situation of being assigned is itself a consequence of the existence of
capital and landed property as independent agents of production.
As regards whole societies, distribution seems to precede production and to determine
it in yet another respect, almost as if it were a pre-economic fact. A conquering people
divides the land among the conquerors, thus imposes a certain distribution and form
of propert y in land, and thus determin es production. Or it enslaves the conquered and
so makes slave labour the foundation of production. Or a people rises in revolution
and smashes the great landed estate s into small parcels, and hence, by this new
distribution, gives production a new character . Or a system of laws assigns property in
land to certain families in perpetuity , or distributes labour [as] a hereditar y privilege
and thus confines it within certain castes. In all these cases, and they are all historical,
it seems that distribution is not struc tured and determined by production, but rather
the opposite, production by distribution.
In the shallowest conception, distribu tion appears as the distribution of products, and
hence as further removed from and quasi-independent of production. But before
112distribution can be the distribution of products, it is: (1) the distribution of the
instruments of production, and (2), which is a further specification of the same
relation, the distribution of the memb ers of the society among the different kinds of
production. (Subsu mption of the individuals under specific relations of production.)
The distribution of products is evide ntly only a result of this distribution, which is
comprised within the process of production itself and determines the structure of
production. To examine production while disregarding this internal distribution within
it is obviously an empty abstraction;  while conversely , the distribution of products
follows by itself from this distribution which forms an original moment of production.
Ricardo, whose concern was to grasp the specific social structure of modern
production, and who is the economist of production par excellence,  declares for
precisely that reason that not production but distribution is the proper study of modern
economics. This again shows the ineptitude of those economists who portray
production as an eternal truth while banishing history to the realm of distribution.
The question of the relation between this production-determining distrib ution, and
production, belongs evidently within production itself. If it is said that, since
production must begin with a certain distribution of the instruments of production, it
follows that distribution at least in this sense precedes and forms the presup position of
production, then the reply must be that production does indeed have its determinants
and preco nditions which form its mom ents. At the very beginning these may appear as
spontaneous, natural. But by the process of production itself they are transformed
from natural into historic determinan ts, and if they appear to one epoch as natural
presuppositions of production, they were its historic product for another . Within
production itself they are constantly being changed. The application of machinery , for
example, changed the distribution of instruments of production as well as of products.
Modern large-scale landed property is itself the product of modern commerce and of
modern industry , as well as of the application of the latter to agriculture.
The questions raised above all reduce themselves in the last instance to the role played
by general-historic al relations in production, and their relation to the movement of
history generally . The question evidently belongs within the treatment and
investigation of production itself.
Still, in the trivial form in which they are raised above, they can be dealt with equally
briefly . In all cases of conquest, three things are possible. The conquering people
subjugates the conquered under its own mode of production (e.g. the English in
Ireland in this century , and partly in India); or it leaves the old mode intact and
contents itself with a tribute (e.g. Turks and Romans); or a reciprocal interaction takes
place whereby some thing new, a synthesis, arises (the Germanic conques ts, in part).
In all cases, the mode of production, whether that of the conquering people,  that of the
conquered, or that emer ging from the fusion of both, is decisive for the new
distribution which arises. Although the latter appears as a presupposition of the new
period of production, it is thus itself in turn a product of production, not only of
historical production generally , but of the specific historic mode of production.
The Mongols, with their devastations  in Russia, e.g., were acting in accor dance with
their production, cattle-raising, for which vast uninhabited spaces are a chief
113precondition. The Germanic barbarians, who lived in isolation on the land and for
whom agriculture with bondsmen was the traditional production, could impose these
conditions on the Roman provinces all the more easily as the concentration of landed
property which had taken place there had already entirely overthrown the earlier
agricultural relations.
It is a received opinion that in certain periods people lived from pillage alone. But, for
pillage to be possible, there must be some thing to be pillaged, hence production. And
the mode of pillag e is itself in turn determined by the mode of productio n. A stock
jobbing nation, for example, cannot be pillaged in the same manner as a nation of
cow-herds.
To steal a slave is to steal the instrument of production directly . But then the
production of the country for which the slave is stolen must be structured to allow of
slave labour , or (as in the southern part of America etc.) a mode of production
corresponding to the slave must be created.
Laws may perpetua te an instrument of production, e.g. land, in certain families. These
laws achieve economic significance  only when large-scale landed property is in
harmony with the society’ s production, as e.g. in England. In France, small-scale
agriculture survive d despite the great landed estates, hence the latter were smashed by
the revolution. But can laws perpetuate the small-scale allotment? Despite these laws,
ownership is again becoming concentrated. The influence of laws in stabilizing
relations of distribution, and hence their effect on production, requires to be
determined in each specific instance.
(c) Exchange, Finally , and Circulation
Exchange and production
Circulation itself [is] merely a specific moment of exchange, or [it is] also exchange
regarded in its totality .
In so far as exchange  is merely a mom ent mediating between production with its
production-determined distribution on one side and consumption on the other , but in
so far as the latter itself appears as a moment of production, to that extent is exchange
obviously also included as a moment within the latter .
It is clear , firstly , that the exchange of activities and abilities which takes place within
production itself belongs directly to production and essentially constitutes it. The
same holds, secondly , for the exchan ge of products, in so far as that exchange is the
means of finishing the product and making it fit for direct consumption. To that
extent, exchange is an act comprised within production itself. Thirdly , the so-called
exchange between dealers and dealer s is by its very organization entirely determined
by production, as well as being itself a producing activity . Exchange appears as
independent of and indifferent to production only in the final phase where the product
is exchanged directly for consumptio n. But (1) there is no exchange witho ut division
of labour , whether the latter is spontaneous, natural, or already a product of historic
development; (2) private exchange presupposes private production; (3) the intensity of
exchange, as well as its extension and its manner , are determined by the development
114and structure of production. For example. Exchange between town and country;
exchange in the country , in the town etc. Exchange in all its moments thus appears as
either directly comprised in production or determined by it.
The conclusion we reach is not that production, distribution, exchange and
consumption are identical, but that they all form the members of a totality , distinctions
within a unity . Production predominates not only over itself, in the antithetical
definition of production, but over the other moments as well. The process always
returns to production to begin anew . That exchange and consumption cannot be
predominant is self-evident. Likewise , distribution as distribution of products; while
as distribution of the agents of production it is itself a moment of production. A
definite production  thus determines a definite consumption, distribution and exchange
as well as definite relations between these differ ent moments . Admittedly , however , in
its one-sided form,  production is itself  determined by the other moments. For example