commodities that alone led to the determination of the magnitude of value, and it was
the common expression of all commodities in money that alone led to the
establishment of their characters as values. It is, however , just this ultim ate money
form of the world of commodities that actually conceals, instead of disclosing, the
social character of private labour , and the social relations between the individual
producers. When I state that coats or boots stand in a relation to linen, becau se it is the
universal incarnatio n of abstract human labour , the absurdity of the statement is self-
evident. Nevertheless, when the producers of coats and boots compare those articles
with linen, or, what is the same thing, with gold or silver , as the universal equivalent,
they express the relation between their own private labour and the collective labour of
society in the same absurd form.
The categories of bourgeois economy consist of such like forms. They are forms of
thought expressing  with social validity the conditions and relations of a definite,
historically determined mode of production, viz., the production of commodities. The
whole mystery of commodities, all the magic and necromancy that surrounds the
products of labour as long as they take the form of commodities, vanishes therefore,
so soon as we come to other forms of production.
Since Robinson Crusoe’ s experiences  are a favourite theme with political economists,
let us take a look at him on his island. Moderate though he be, yet some few wants he
has to satisfy , and must therefore do a little useful work of various sorts, such as
making tools and furniture, taming goats, fishing and hunting. Of his prayers and the
like we take no account, since they are a source of pleasure to him, and he looks upon
them as so much recreation. In spite of the variety of his work, he knows that his
labour , whatever its form, is but the activity of one and the same Robinson, and
consequently , that it consists of nothing but different modes of human labour .
Necessity itself compels him to appo rtion his time accurately between his different
kinds of work. Whether one kind occupies a greater space in his general activity than
another , depends on the difficulties, greater or less as the case may be, to be overcome
in attaining the useful effect aimed at. This our friend Robinson soon learns by
173experience, and having rescued a watch, ledger , and pen and ink from the wreck,
commences, like a true-born Briton, to keep a set of books. His stock-book  contains a
list of the objects of utility that belong to him, of the operations necessary for their
production; and lastly , of the labour time that definite quantities of those objects have,
on an average, cost him. All the relations between Robinson and the object s that form
this wealth of his own creation, are here so simple and clear as to be intelligible
without exertion, even to Mr. Sedley Taylor . And yet those relations contain all that is
essential to the determination of value.
Let us now transpo rt ourselves from Robinson’ s island bathed in light to the European
middle ages shrou ded in darkness. Here, instead of the independent man, we find
everyone depende nt, serfs and lords, vassals and suzerains, laymen and clergy.
Personal dependence here characterise s the social relations of production just as much
as it does the other spheres of life organised on the basis of that production. But for
the very reason that personal dependence forms the ground-work of society , there is
no necessity for labour and its products to assume a fantastic form different from their
reality . They take the shape, in the transactions of society , of services in kind and
payments in kind. Here the particula r and natural form of labour , and not, as in a
society based on production of commodities, its general abstract form is the
immediate social form of labour . Compulsory labour is just as properly measured by
time, as commodit y-producing labour ; but every serf knows that what he expends in
the service of his lord, is a definite quantity of his own personal labour power . The
tithe to be rendered to the priest is more matter of fact than his blessing. No matter ,
then, what we may think of the parts played by the different classes of people
themselves in this society , the social relations between individuals in the performance
of their labour , appear at all events as their own mutual personal relations, and are not
disguised under the shape of social relations between the products of labour .
For an example of labour in common or directly associated labour , we have no
occasion to go back to that spontaneously developed form which we find on the
threshold of the history of all civilised races. We have one close at hand in the
patriarchal industries of a peasant family , that produces corn, cattle, yarn, linen, and
clothing for home use. These different articles are, as regards the family , so many
products of its labour, but as betwe en themselves, they are not commo dities. The
different kinds of labour , such as tillag e, cattle tending, spinning, weaving and making
clothes, which result in the various products, are in themselves, and such as they are,
direct social functions, because functions of the family , which, just as much as a
society based on the production of commodities, possesses a spontaneously  developed
system of division of labour . The distribution of the work within the family , and the
regulation of the labour time of the several members, depend as well upon differences
of age and sex as upon natural conditions varying with the seasons. The labour power
of each individual, by its very nature, operates in this case merely as a defin ite portion
of the whole labour power of the family, and therefore, the measure of the expenditure
of individual labour power by its duration, appears here by its very nature as a social
character of their labour .
Let us now picture  to ourselves, by way of change, a community of free individuals,
carrying on their work with the means of production in common, in which  the labour
174power of all the different individuals  is consciously applied as the combined labour
power of the community . All the characteristics of Robinson’ s labou r are here
repeated, but with this difference, that they are social, instead of individual.
Everything produc ed by him was exclusively the result of his own perso nal labour ,
and therefore simply an object of use for himself. The total product of our community
is a social product. One portion serves as fresh means of production and remains
social. But another portion is consum ed by the members as means of subsistence. A
distribution of this portion amongst them is consequently necessary . The mode of this
distribution will vary with the productive organisation of the communit y, and the
degree of historical development attained by the producers. We will assume, but
merely for the sake of a parallel with the production of commodities, that the share of
each individual producer in the means  of subsistence is determined by his labour time.
Labour time would , in that case, play a double part. Its apportionment in accordance
with a definite social plan maintains the proper proportion between the different kinds
of work to be done and the various wants of the community . On the other hand, it also
serves as a measure of the portion of the common labour borne by each individual,
and of his share in the part of the total product destined for individual consumption.
The social relations of the individual producers, with regard both to their labour and to
its products, are in this case perfectly simple and intelligible, and that with regard not
only to production but also to distribution.
The religious world is but the reflex of the real world. And for a society based upon
the produ ction of commodities, in which the producers in general enter into social
relations with one another by treating their products as commodities and values,
whereby they reduce their individual  private labour to the standard of homogeneous
human labour – for such a society , Christianity with its cultus  of abstract man, more
especially in its bourgeois developments, Protestantism, Deism, &c., is the most
fitting form of religion. In the ancient Asiatic and other ancient modes of production,
we find that the conversion of products into commodities, and therefore the
conversion of men into producers of commodities, holds a subordinate place, which,
however , increases  in importance as the primitive communities approach nearer and
nearer to their dissolution. Trading nations, properly so called, exist in the ancient
world only in its interstices, like the gods of Epicurus in the Intermundia, or like Jews
in the pores of Polish society . Those ancient social organisms of product ion are, as
compared with bourgeois society , extremely simple and transparent. But they are
founded either on the immature development of man individually , who has not yet
severed the umbilical cord that unite s him with his fellowmen in a prim itive tribal
community , or upon direct relations of subjection. They can arise and exist  only when
the develo pment of the productive power of labour has not risen beyond a low stage,
and when , therefor e, the social relati ons within the sphere of material life, between
man and man, and between man and Nature, are correspondingly narrow . This
narrowness is reflected in the ancient  worship of Nature, and in the other elements of
the popular religions. The religious reflex of the real world can, in any case, only then
finally vanish, when the practical relations of every-day life offer to man none but
perfectly intelligible and reasonable relations with regard to his fellowmen and to
Nature.
175The life-process of society , which is based on the process of material produ ction, does