exert pressure. Even the moral self-feeling of the German middle class  rests only on
the consciousness that it is the common representative of the philistine mediocrity of
all the other classe s. It is therefore not only the German kings who accede to the
12throne mal à propos , it is every section of civil society which goes through a defeat
before it celebrates victory and develops its own limitations before it overcomes the
limitations facing it, asserts its narrow-hearted essence before it has been able to
assert its magnanimous essence; thus the very opportunity of a great role has passed
away before it is to hand, and every class, once it begins the struggle against the class
opposed to it, is involved in the strug gle against the class below it. Hence, the higher
nobility is struggling against the monarchy , the bureaucrat against the nobility , and the
bourgeois against them all, while the proletariat is already beginning to find itself
struggling against the bourgeoisie. The middle class hardly dares to grasp the thought
of emanc ipation from its own standpoint when the development of the social
conditions and the progress of political theory already declare that standpoint
antiquated or at least problematic.
In France , it is enough for somebody to be something for him to want to be
everything; in Germany , nobody can be anything if he is not prepared to renounce
everything. In France, partial emancipation is the basis of universal emancipation; in
Germany , universa l emancipation is the conditio sine qua non of any partial
emancipation. In France, it is the reality of gradual liberation that must give birth to
complete freedom, in Germany , the impossibility of gradual liberation. In France,
every class of the nation is a political idealist  and becomes aware of itself at first not
as a partic ular class but as a representative of social requirements generall y. The role
of emancipator  therefore passes in dramatic motion to the various classes of the
French nation one after the other until it finally comes to the class which implements
social freedom no longer with the provision of certain conditions lying outside man
and yet created by human society , but rather organizes all conditions of human
existence on the premises of social freedom. On the contrary , in Germa ny, where
practical life is as spiritless as spiritual life is unpractical, no class in civil society has
any need or capac ity for general emancipation until it is forced by its immediate
condition, by material  necessity , by its very chains .
Where, then, is the positive  possibility of a German emancipation?
Answer : In the formulatio n of a class with radical chains , a class of civil society
which is not a class of civil society , an estate which is the dissolution of all estates, a
sphere which has a universal character by its universal suffering and claims no
particular right  because no particular wrong, but wrong generally , is perpetuated
against it; which can invoke no historical , but only human , title; which does not stand
in any one-sided antithesis to the consequences but in all-round antithesis to the
premises of German statehood; a sphere, finally , which cannot emancipate itself
without emancipating itself from all other spheres of society and thereby
emancipating all other spheres of society , which, in a word, is the complete loss of
man and hence can win itself only through the complete re-winnin g of man. This
dissolution of society as a particular estate is the proletariat .
The proletariat is beginning to appear in Germany as a result of the rising industrial
movement. For, it is not the naturally arising  poor but the artificially impover ished ,
not the human masses mechanically oppressed by the gravity of society , but the
masses resulting from the drastic dissolution  of societ y, mainly  of the middle estate,
13that form the proletariat, although, as is easily understood, the naturally arising poor
and the Christian-Germanic serfs gradually join its ranks.
By heralding the dissolution of the hereto existing world order, the prole tariat merely
proclaims the secret of its own existence , for it is the factual dissolution of that world
order . By demanding the negation of private property , the proletariat merely raises to
the rank of a principle of society what society has raised to the rank of its principle,
what is already incorporated in it as the negative result of society without its own
participation. The proletarian then finds himself possessing the same right in regard to
the world which is coming into being as the German king in regard to the world which
has come into being when he calls the people his people, as he calls the horse his
horse. By declaring the people his private property , the king merely proclai ms that the
private owner is king.
As philos ophy finds its material weap on in the proletariat, so the proletariat finds its
spiritual  weapon in philoso phy. And once the lightning of thought has squarely struck
this ingen uous soil of the people, the emancipation of the Germans  into men will be
accomplished.
Let us sum up the result:
The only liberation  of Germany which is practically  possible is liberation from the
point of view of that theory which declares man to be the supreme being for man.
Germany can emancipate itself from the Middle Ages only if it emancipa tes itself at
the same time from  the partial  victories over the Middle Ages . In Germany , no form
of bondage can be broken without breaking all forms of bondage. Germany , which is
renowned for its thoroughness , cannot make a revolution unless it is a thorough  one.
The emancipation of the German  is the emancipation of man. The head  of this
emancipation is philosophy , its heart  the proletariat . Philosop hy cannot realize itself
without the transcendence [Aufhebung ] of the proletariat, and the proletaria t cannot
transcend itself without the realization of philosophy .
When all the inner conditions are met, the day of the German resurr ection  will be
heralded by the crowing of the cock of Gaul .
14Theses on Feuerbach
(1845)
1
The main  defect of all hitherto-existin g materialism - that of Feuerbach included - is
that the Object [Gegenstand ], actuality, sensuousness, are conceive d only in the form
of the object [Objekt ], or of contemplation, but not as human sensuous activity ,
practice, not subjectively . Hence it happened that the active side, in opposition to
materialism, was developed by idealism - but only abstractly , since, of course,
idealism does not know real, sensuo us activity as such. Feuerbach wants sensuous
objects, differentia ted from thought-objects, but he does not conceive human activity
itself as objective activity . In The Essence of Christianity , he therefore regards the
theoretical attitude as the only genuinely human attitude, while practice is conceived
and defin ed only in its dirty-Jewish form of appearance. Hence he does not grasp the
significance of ‘revolutionary’, of ‘practical-critical’, activity .
2
The question whether objective truth can be attributed to human thinking is not a
question of theory but is a practical  question. Man must prove the truth, i.e., the
reality and power , the this-sidedness of his thinking, in practice. The dispute over the
reality or non-reali ty of thinking which is isolated from practice is a purely scholastic
question.
3
The mate rialist doctrine that men are products of circumstances and upbringing, and
that, therefore, changed men are products of changed circumstances and changed
upbringing, forgets that it is men who change circumstances and that the educator
must himself be educated. Hence this doctrine is bound to divide society into two
parts, one of which is superior to society . The coincidence of the changing of
circumstances and of human activity  or self-change can be conceived and rationally
understood only as revolutionary practice .
4
Feuerbach starts off from the fact of religious self-estrangement, of the duplication of
the world  into a religious, imaginary world, and a secular one. His work consists in
resolving the religious world into its secular basis. He overlooks the fact that after
completing this work, the chief thing  still remains to be done. For the fact that the
secular basis lifts off from itself and establishes itself in the clouds as an independent
realm can only be explained by the inner strife and intrinsic contradictoriness of this
secular basis. The latter must itself be understood in its contradiction and then, by the
15removal of the contradiction, revolutionised. Thus, for instance, once the earthly
family is discovere d to be the secret of the holy family , the former must itself be
annihilated theoretically and practically .
5
Feuerbach, not satisfied with abstract thinking , wants sensuous contemp lation ; but
he does not conceive sensuousness as practical , human-sensuous activity .
6
Feuerbach resolves  the essence of religion into the essence of man. But the essence of
man is no abstraction inherent in each single individual. In reality , it is the ensemble
of the social relations. Feuerbach, who does not enter upon a criticism of this real
essence is hence obliged:
1. To abstract from the historical process and to define the religious sentiment
regarded by itself, and to presuppose an abstract - isolated - human individual.
2. The essence therefore can by him only be regarded as ‘species’, as an inner
‘dumb’  generality which unites many individuals only in a natural  way.
7
Feuerbach consequ ently does not see that the ‘religious sentiment’  is itself a social
product , and that the abstract individual that he analyses belongs in reality to a
particular social form.
8
All social life is essentially practical . All mysteries which lead theory to mysticism
find their rational solution in human practice and in the comprehension of this
practice.
9