growing accumulation and mobilisation of natural capital through accelerated
circulation, the demand for luxuries called forth by the latter and favoured  generally
by the gradual extension of commerce, gave weaving a quantitative and qualitative
stimulus, which wrenched it out of the form of production hitherto existing.  Alongside
the peasa nts weaving for their own use, who continued, and still continue, with this
sort of work, there  emer ged a new class of weavers in the towns, whose fabrics were
destined for the whole home market and usually for foreign markets too.
Weaving, an occupation demanding in most cases little skill and soon splitting up into
countless branches , by its whole nature resisted the trammels of the guild . Weaving
was, therefore, carried on mostly in villages and market-centres without guild
organisation, which gradually became  towns, and indeed the most flourishing towns
in each land.
With guild-free manufacture, prope rty relations also quickly changed. The first
advance beyond naturally derived estate capital was provided by the rise of merchants
whose capital was from the beginning movable, capital in the modern sense as far as
one can speak of it, given the circums tances of those times. The second advance came
with manufacture, which again made mobile a mass of natural capital, and altogether
increased the mass of movable capital as against that of natural capital.
At the same time, manufacture becam e a refuge of the peasants from the guilds which
excluded them or paid them badly , just as earlier the guild-towns had [served] as a
refuge for the peasants from [the oppressive landed nobility].
Simultaneously with the beginning of manufactures there was a period of
vagabondage cause d by the abolition of the feudal bodies of retainers, the disbanding
of the swollen armies which had flocked to serve the kings against their vassals, the
improvement of agriculture, and the transformation of great strips of tillage into
pasture land. From this alone it is clear how this vagabondage is strictly connected
with the disintegration of the feudal system. As early as the thirteenth century we find
isolated epochs of this kind, but only at the end of the fifteenth and beginning of the
45sixteenth does this vagabondage make a general and permanent appearance. These
vagabonds, who were so numerous that, for instance, Henry VIII of England had
72,000 of them hanged, were only prevailed upon to work with the greates t difficulty
and throu gh the most extreme necessi ty, and then only after long resistance. The rapid
rise of manufactures, particularly in England, absorbed them gradually .
With the advent of manufactures, the various nations entered into a competitive
relationship, the struggle for trade, which was fought out in wars, protec tive duties
and prohibitions, whereas earlier the nations, insofar as they were connected at all,
had carrie d on an inoffensive exchan ge with each other . Trade had from now on a
political significance.
With the advent of manufacture the relationship between worker and employer
changed. In the guilds the patriarchal relationship between journeyman and master
continued to exist; in manufacture its place was taken by the moneta ry relation
between worker and capitalist - a relationship which in the countryside and in small
towns retained a patriarchal tinge, but in the larger, the real manufacturing towns,
quite early lost almost all patriarchal complexion.
Manufacture and the movement of production in general received an enormous
impetus through the extension of commerce which came with the discovery of
America and the sea-route to the East Indies. The new products imported thence,
particularly the masses of gold and silver which came into circulation and totally
changed the positio n of the classes towards one another , dealing a hard blow to feudal
landed property and to the workers; the expeditions of adventurers, colonisation; and
above all the extension of markets into a world market, which had now become
possible and was daily becoming more and more a fact, called forth a new phase of
historical development, into which in general we cannot here enter further . Through
the colon isation of the newly discov ered countries the commercial struggle of the
nations amongst one another was given new fuel and accordingly greater extension
and animosity .
The expansion of trade and manufacture accelerated the accumulation of movable
capital, while in the guilds, which were not stimulated to extend their production,
natural capital remained stationary or even declined. Trade and manufacture created
the big bourgeoisie; in the guilds was concentrated the petty bourgeoisie, which no
longer was dominant in the towns as formerly , but had to bow to the might of the
great merchants and manufacturers. Hence the decline of the guilds, as soon as they
came into contact with manufacture.
The interc ourse of nations took on, in the epoch of which we have been speaking, two
different forms. At first the small quantity of gold and silver in circulation involved
the ban on the export of these metals ; and industry , for the most part imported from
abroad and made necessary by the need for employing the growing urban population,
could not do without those privileges which could be granted not only, of course,
against home comp etition, but chiefly against foreign. The local guild privilege was in
these original prohibitions extended over the whole nation. Customs duties originated
from the tributes which the feudal lords exacted as protective levies again st robbery
from merchants passing through their territories, tributes later imposed likew ise by the
46towns, and which, with the rise of the modern states, were the Treasury's most
obvious means of raising money .
The appe arance of American gold and silver on the European markets, the gradual
development of industry , the rapid expansion of trade and the consequent rise of the
non-guild bourgeoisie and of money , gave these measures another signifi cance. The
State, which was daily less and less able to do without money , now retained the ban
on the export of gold and silver out of fiscal considerations; the bourgeois, for whom
these masses of money which were hurled onto the market became the chief object of
speculative buying, were thoroughly content with this; privileges established earlier
became a source of income for the government and were sold for money; in the
customs legislation there appeared the export duty, which, since it only [placed] a
hindrance in the way of industry , had a purely fiscal aim.
The second period began in the middle of the seventeenth century and lasted almost to
the end of the eighteenth. Commerce and navigation had expanded more rapidly than
manufacture, which played a secondary role; the colonies were becoming
considerable consumers; and after long struggles the separate nations shared out the
opening world market among thems elves. This period begins with the Navigation
Laws and colonial monopolies. The competition of the nations among themselves was
excluded as far as possible by tariffs, prohibitions and treaties; and in the last resort
the competitive struggle was carried on and decided by wars (especially naval wars).
The mightiest maritime nation, the English, retained preponderance in trade and
manufacture. Here, already , we find concentration in one country .
Manufacture was all the time shelter ed by protective duties in the home market, by
monopolies in the colonial market, and abroad as much as possible by differential
duties. The working-up of home-produced material was encouraged (wool and linen
in Englan d, silk in France), the export of home-produced raw material  forbidden
(wool in England),  and the [working-up] of imported material neglected or suppressed
(cotton in England ). The nation dominant in sea trade and colonial power naturally
secured for itself also the greate st quantitative and qualitative expansion of
manufacture. Manufacture could not be carried on without protection, since, if the
slightest change takes place in other countries, it can lose its market and be ruined;
under reasonably favourable condition s it may easily be introduced into a country , but
for this very reaso n can easily be destroyed. At the same time through the mode in
which it is carried on, particularly in the eighteenth century , in the countrys ide, it is to
such an extent interwoven with the vital relationships of a great mass of individuals,
that no country dare jeopardise its existence by permitting free competition. Insofar as
it manage s to export, it therefore depends entirely on the extension or restriction of
commerce, and exercises a relatively very small reaction [on the latter]. Hence its
secondary [importa nce] and the influe nce of [the merchants] in the eighteenth century .
It was the merchan ts and especially the shippers who more than anybody else pressed
for State protection and monopolies;  the manufacturers also demanded and indeed
received protection, but all the time were inferior in political importance to the
merchants. The commercial towns, particularly the maritime towns, became to some
extent civilised and acquired the outlook of the big bourgeoisie, but in the factory
towns an extreme petty-bour geois outlook persisted. Cf Aikin, etc. The eighteenth
47century was the century of trade. Pinto says this expressly: ‘Commerce is the rage of
the centu ry.’ ‘For some time now people have been talking only about commerce,
navigation and the navy .’ [In French in the original]
This period is also characterised by the cessation of the bans on the export of gold and
silver and the beginning of the trade in money; by banks, national debts, paper money;
by speculation in stocks and shares and stockjobbing in all articles; by the
development of finance in general. Again capital lost a great part of the natural
character which had still clung to it.