to it consciousness of pressure, the shame must be made more shameful by
publicizing it. Every sphere of Germa n society must be shown as the partie honteuse
of German society: these petrified relations must be forced to dance by singing their
own tune to them! The people must be taught to be terrified  at itself in order to give it
courage . This will be fulfilling an imperative need of the German nation, and the
needs of the nations are in themselves the ultimate reason for their satisfaction.
This struggle against the limited content of the German status quo cannot be without
interest even for the modern  nations, for the German status quo is the open
completion of the ancien régime  and the ancien régime  is the concealed deficiency of
the mode rn state . The struggle against the German political present is the struggle
against the past of the modern nations, and they are still burdened with reminders of
that past. It is instructive for them to see the ancien régime , which has been through
its tragedy  with them, playin g its comedy  as a German revenant. Tragic  indeed was
the pre-ex isting power of the world, and freedom, on the other hand, was a personal
notion; in short, as long as it believed and had to believe in its own justification. As
long as the ancien régime , as an existing world order , struggled against a world that
was only coming into being, there was on its side a historical error , not a personal one.
That is why its downfall was tragic.
On the other hand, the present German regime, an anachronism, a flagrant
contradiction of generally recognized  axioms, the nothingness of the ancien régime
exhibited to the world, only imagine s that it believes in itself and deman ds that the
world should imagine the same thing. If it believed in its own essence , would it try to
hide that essence under the semblance  of an alien essence and seek refuge in
hypocrisy and sophism? The modern ancien régime  is rather only the comedian  of a
world order whose true heroes are dead. History is thorough and goes through many
phases when carrying an old form to the grave. The last phases of a world -historical
7form is its comedy . The gods of Greece, already tragically wounded to death in
Aeschylus’ s tragedy Prometheus Bound , had to re-die a comic death in Lucian’ s
Dialogues . Why this course of history? So that humanity should part with its past
cheerfully . This cheerful  historical destiny is what we vindicate for the political
authorities of Germany .
Meanwhile, once modern  politico- social reality itself is subjec ted to criticism, once
criticism rises to truly human problem s, it finds itself outside the German status quo,
or else it would reach out for its object below  its object. An example. The relation of
industry , of the world of wealth generally , to the political world is one of the major
problems of modern times. In what form is this problem beginning to engage the
attention of the Germans? In the form of protective duties , of the prohibitive system ,
of national economy . Germano mania has passed out of man into matter , and thus one
morning our cotton barons and iron heroes saw themselves turned into patriots.
People are, therefore, beginning in Germany to acknowledge the sovereignty of
monopoly on the inside through lending it sover eignty on the outside . People are,
therefore, now about to begin, in Germany , what people in France and England are
about to end. The old corrupt condition against which these countries are revolting in
theory , and which they only bear as one bears chains, is greeted in Germany as the
dawn of a beautiful future which still hardly dares to pass from crafty  theory to the
most ruthless practice. Whereas the problem in France and England is: Political
economy , or the rule of society over wealth ; in Germany , it is: National economy , or
the mastery of private property over nationality . In Franc e and England, then, it is a
case of abolishing monopoly that has proceeded to its last consequences; in Germany ,
it is a case of proceeding to the last consequences of monopoly . There it is a case of
solution, here as yet a case of collision. This is an adequate example of the German
form of modern problems, an exampl e of how our history , like a clumsy recruit, still
has to do extra drill on things that are old and hackneyed in history .
If, therefo re, the whole  German developm ent did not exceed the German political
development, a German could at the most have the share in the problems-of-the-
present that a Russian has. But, when the separate individual is not bound by the
limitations of the nation, the nation as a whole is still less liberated by the liberation of
one indiv idual. The fact that Greece had a Scythian among its philosophers did not
help the Scythians to make a single step towards Greek culture.
Luckily , we Germans are not Scythians.
As the ancient peoples went through their pre-history in imagination, in mythology , so
we Germ ans have gone through our post-history in thought, in philosophy . We are
philosophical contemporaries of the present without being its historical
contemporaries. German philosophy is the ideal prolongation  of German history . If
therefore, instead of the oeuvr es incompletes  of our real histo ry, we criticize the
oeuvr es posthumes  of our ideal history , philosophy , our criticism is in the midst of the
questions of which the present says: that is the question . What, in progressive nations,
is a practical  break with modern state conditions, is, in Germany , where even those
conditions do not yet exist, at first a critical break with the philosophical reflexion of
those conditions.
8German philosophy  of right and state  is the only German history  which is al pari with
the official  modern present. The German nation must therefore join this, its dream-
history , to its present conditions and subject to criticism not only these existing
conditions, but at the same time their abstract continuation. Its future cannot be
limited  either to the imme diate negation of its real conditions of state and right, or to
the imme diate implementation of its ideal state and right conditions, for it has the
immediate negatio n of its real conditions in its ideal conditions, and it has almost
outlived  the immediate implementation of its ideal conditions in the contemplation of
neighboring nations. Hence, it is with good reason that the practical  political party in
Germany demands the negation of philosophy .
It is wrong, not in its demand but in stopping at the demand, which it neither seriously
implements nor can implement. It believes that it implements that negation by turning
its back to philosophy and its head away from it and muttering a few trite and angry
phrases about it. Owing to the limitation of its outlook, it does not include philosophy
in the circle of German  reality or it even fancies it is beneath  German practice and the
theories that serve it. You demand that real life embryos be made the starting-point,
but you forget that the real life embryo of the German nation has grown so far only
inside its cranium . In a word – You cann ot abolish  [aufheben ] philosophy without
making it a r eality .
The same mistake, but with the factors reversed , was made by the theor etical  party
originating from philosophy .
In the present struggle it saw only the critical struggle of philosophy against the
German world ; it did not give a thought to the fact that philosophy up to the present
itself belongs to this world and is its completion, although an ideal one. Critical
towards its counterpart, it was uncri tical towards itself when, proceeding from the
premises  of philos ophy , it either stopped at the results given by philosophy or passed
off demands and results from somewhere else as immediate demands and results of
philosophy – although these, provide d they are justified, can be obtained only by the
negation of philosophy up to the present, of philosophy as such. We reserve ourselves
the right to a more detailed description of this section: It thought it could make
philosophy a r eality without abolishing  [aufzuheben ] it.
The critic ism of the German philosophy of state and right, which attained its most
consistent, richest,  and last formulati on through Hegel , is both a critical analysis of
the modern state and of the reality connected with it, and the resolute nega tion of the
whole manner of the German consciousness in politics and right  as practiced  hereto,
the most distingui shed, most universal expression of which, raised to the level of
science , is the speculative philoso phy of right itself. If the speculative philosophy of
right, that abstract  extravagant thinking  on the modern state, the reality of which
remains a thing of the beyond, if only beyond the Rhine, was possible only in
Germany , inversely the German thought-image of the modern state which makes
abstraction of real man was possible only because and insofar as the modern state
itself makes abstraction of real man, or satisfies the whole of man only in
imagination. In politics, the Germans thought  what other nations did. Germany was
their theor etical conscience . The abstraction and presumption of its thought was
9always in step with the one-sidedness and lowliness of its reality . If, therefore, the
status quo of German statehood  expresses the completion  of the ancien régime , the
completion of the thorn in the flesh of the modern state, the status quo of German
state science expresses the incompletion of the modern state , the defectiveness of its
flesh itself.
Already as the resolute opponent of the previous form of German  political
consciousness the criticism of specul ative philosophy of right strays, not into itself,
but into problems  which there is only one means of solving – practice .
It is asked: can Germany attain a practice à la hauteur des principles  – i.e., a