and quant ity. ‘Liberation’  is an histori cal and not a mental act, and it is brought about
by historical conditions, the development of industry , commerce, agriculture, the
conditions of intercourse... [There is here a gap in the manuscript]
36In Germa ny, a country where only a trivial historical development is taking place,
these mental developments, these glorified and ineffective trivialities, naturally serve
as a substitute for the lack of historical development, and they take root and have to be
combated. But this fight is of local importance.
[2. Feuerbach’s Contemplative and Inconsistent Materialism]
In reality  and for the practical mate rialist, i.e. the communist, it is a question of
revolutionising the existing world, of practically attacking and changing existing
things. When occasionally we find such views with Feuerbach, they are never more
than isolated surmises and have much too little influence on his general outlook to be
considered here as anything else than embryos capable of development. Feuerbach’ s
conception of the sensuous world is confined on the one hand to mere contemplation
of it, and on the other to mere feeling; he says ‘Man’  instead of ‘real historical man.’
‘Man’  is really ‘the German.’  In the first case, the contemplation of the sensuous
world, he necessarily lights on things  which contradict his consciousness and feeling,
which disturb the harmony he presup poses, the harmony of all parts of the sensuous
world and especially of man and nature. To remove this disturbance, he must take
refuge in a double perception, a profane one which only perceives the ‘flatl y obvious’
and a higher , philo sophical, one which perceives the ‘true essence’  of things. He does
not see how the sensuous world around him is, not a thing given direc t from all
eternity , remaining ever the same, but the product of industry and of the state of
society; and, indee d, in the sense that it is an historical product, the result of the
activity of a whole succession of generations, each standing on the shoulders of the
preceding one, developing its industry and its intercourse, modifying its social system
according to the changed needs. Even the objects of the simplest ‘sensuous  certainty’
are only given him through social development, industry and commercial intercourse.
The cherry-tree, like almost all fruit-trees, was, as is well known, only a few centuries
ago transplanted by commerce into our zone, and therefore only by this action of a
definite society in a definite age it has become ‘sensuous certainty’  for Feuerbach.
Incidentally , when we conceive thing s thus, as they really are and happe ned, every
profound philosoph ical problem is resolved, as will be seen even more clearly later,
quite simply into an empirical fact. For instance, the important question of the relation
of man to nature (Bruno [Bauer]  goes so far as to speak of ‘the antitheses in nature
and history’  (p. 110), as though these were two separate ‘things’  and man did not
always have before him an historical nature and a natural history) out of which all the
‘unfathomably lofty works’  on ‘substance’  and ‘self-consciousness’  were born,
crumbles of itself when we understand that the celebrated ‘unity of man with nature’
has always existed in industry and has existed in varying forms in every epoch
according to the lesser or greater development of industry , just like the ‘struggle’  of
man with nature, right up to the development of his productive powers on a
corresponding basis. Industry and commerce, production and the exchange of the
necessities of life, themselves determine distribution, the structure of the different
social classes and are, in turn, determined by it as to the mode in which they are
carried on; and so it happens that in Manchester , for instance, Feuerbach sees only
factories and machines, where a hundred years ago only spinning-wheels and
37weaving-rooms were to be seen, or in the Campagna of Rome he finds only pasture
lands and swamps,  where in the time of Augustus he would have found nothing but
the viney ards and villas of Roman capitalists. Feuerbach speaks in particular of the
perception of natural science; he mentions secrets which are disclosed only to the eye
of the physicist and chemist; but where would natural science be without industry and
commerce? Even this pure natural science is provided with an aim, as with its
material, only through trade and industry , through the sensuous activity of men. So
much is this activity , this unceasing sensuous labour and creation, this production, the
basis of the whole sensuous world as it now exists, that, were it interrupted only for a
year, Feuerbach would not only find an enormous change in the natural world, but
would very soon find that the whole world of men and his own perceptive faculty , nay
his own existence, were missing. Of course, in all this the priority of external nature
remains unassailed, and all this has no application to the original men produced by
generatio aequivoca  [spontaneous generation] ; but this differentiation has meaning
only insofar as man is considered to be distinct from nature. For that matter , nature,
the nature that preceded human history , is not by any means the nature in which
Feuerbach lives, it is nature which today no longer exists anywhere (except perhaps
on a few Australian coral-islands of recent origin) and which, therefore, does not exist
for Feuerbach.
Certainly Feuerbach has a great advantage over the ‘pure’  materialists in that he
realises how man too is an ‘object of the senses.’  But apart from the fact that he only
conceives him as an ‘object of the senses, not as sensuous activity ,’ because he still
remains in the realm of theory and conceives of men not in their given social
connection, not under their existing conditions of life, which have made them what
they are, he never arrives at the really  existing active men, but stops at the abstraction
‘man,’  and gets no further than recognising ‘the true, individual, corpo real man,’
emotionally , i.e. he knows no other ‘human relationships’  ‘of man to man’ than love
and friendship, and even then idealised. He gives no criticism of the present
conditions of life. Thus he never manages to conceive the sensuous world as the total
living sensuous activity  of the individuals composing it; and therefore when, for
example, he sees instead of healthy men a crowd of scrofulous, overworked and
consumptive starve lings, he is compe lled to take refuge in the ‘higher perception’  and
in the ideal ‘compe nsation in the species,’  and thus to relapse into idealism at the very
point where the communist materiali st sees the necessity , and at the same time the
condition, of a transformation both of industry and of the social structure.
As far as Feuerbach is a materialist he does not deal with history , and as far as he
considers history he is not a materialist. With him materialism and history diver ge
completely , a fact which incidentally is already obvious from what has been said.
Ruling Class and Ruling Ideas
The ideas of the ruling class are in every epoch the ruling ideas, i.e. the class which is
the ruling material force of society , is at the same time its ruling intellectual  force. The
class which has the means of materi al production at its disposal, has control at the
same time over the means of mental production, so that thereby , generally speaking,
38the ideas of those who lack the means of mental production are subject to it. The
ruling ideas are nothing more than the ideal expression of the dominan t material
relationships, the dominant material relationships grasped as ideas; hence of the
relationships which make the one class the ruling one, therefore, the ideas of its
dominance. The individuals composi ng the ruling class possess among other things
consciousness, and therefore think. Insofar , therefore, as they rule as a class and
determine the extent and compass of an epoch, it is self-evident that they do this in its
whole range, hence among other things rule also as thinkers, as producers of ideas,
and regul ate the production and distri bution of the ideas of their age: thus their ideas
are the ruling ideas  of the epoch. For instance, in an age and in a country where royal
power , aristocracy , and bourgeoisie are contending for mastery and where, therefore,
mastery is shared, the doctrine of the separation of powers proves to be the dominant
idea and is expressed as an ‘eternal law .’
The division of labour , which we already saw above as one of the chief forces of
history up till now, manifests itself also in the ruling class as the division of mental
and mater ial labour , so that inside this class one part appears as the thinkers of the
class (its active, conceptive ideologists, who make the perfecting of the illusion of the
class abou t itself their chief source of livelihood), while the others’  attitude to these
ideas and illusions is more passive and receptive, because they are in reality the active
members of this class and have less time to make up illusions and ideas about
themselves. Within this class this cleavage can even develop into a certain opposition
and hosti lity betw een the two parts, which, however , in the case of a practical
collision, in which the class itself is endangered, automatically comes to nothing, in
which case there also vanishes the semblance that the ruling ideas were not the ideas
of the ruling class and had a power distinct from the power of this class. The existence
of revolutionary ideas in a particular period presupposes the existence of a
revolutionary class ; about the premis es for the latter sufficient has already been said
above.
If now in considering the course of history we detach the ideas of the ruling class
from the ruling class itself and attribute to them an independent existe nce, if we