Communists ally with the Social-Democrats against the conservative and radical
bourgeoisie, reserving, however , the right to take up a critical position in regard to
phases and illusions traditionally handed down from the great Revolution.
In Switzerland, they support the Radicals, without losing sight of the fact that this
party consists of antagonistic element s, partly of Democratic Socialists, in the French
sense, partly of radical bour geois.
84In Poland , they support the party that insists on an agrarian revolution as the prime
condition for national emancipation,  that party which fomented the insurrection of
Cracow in 1846.
In Germany , they fight with the bourgeoisie whenever it acts in a revolutionary way,
against the absolute monarchy , the feudal squirearchy , and the petty bour geoisie.
But they never cease, for a single instant, to instil into the working class the clearest
possible recognitio n of the hostile antagonism between bourgeoisie and proletariat, in
order that the German workers may straightway use, as so many weapons against the
bourgeoisie, the social and political conditions that the bourgeoisie must necessarily
introduce along with its supremacy , and in order that, after the fall of the reactionary
classes in Germany , the fight against the bour geoisie itself may immediately begin.
The Com munists turn their attention chiefly to Germany , because that country is on
the eve of a bourgeois revolution that is bound to be carried out under more advanced
conditions of European civilisation and with a much more developed proletariat than
that of England was in the seventee nth, and France in the eighteenth century , and
because the bourgeois revolution in Germany will be but the prelude to an
immediately following proletarian revolution.
In short, the Comm unists everywhere  support every revolutionary movement against
the existin g social and political order of things. In all these movements, they bring to
the front, as the leading question in each, the property question, no matter what its
degree of development at the time. Finally , they labour everywhere for the union and
agreement of the democratic parties of all countries.
The Com munists disdain to conceal their views and aims. They openly declare that
their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of all existing social
conditions. Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communistic revolution. The
proletarians have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win.
Working Men of All Countries, Unite!
 
85The Paris Commune
Address to the International
Workingmen’s Association, May 1871
On the dawn of March 18, Paris arose to the thunder -burst of “Vive la Commune!”
What is the Commune, that sphinx so tantalizing to the bour geois mind?
“The proletarians of Paris,” said the Central Committee in its manifesto of March 18,
“amidst the failure s and treasons of the ruling classes, have understood that the hour
has struck for them to save the situat ion by taking into their own hands the direction
of public affairs.... They have understood that it is their imperious duty, and their
absolute right, to render themselves masters of their own destinies, by seizing upon
the governmental power .”
But the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made state machinery ,
and wield it for  its own purposes.
The centralized state power , with its ubiquitous organs of standing army, police,
bureaucracy , clergy, and judicature – organs wrought after the plan of a systematic and
hierarchic division of labor – originates from the days of absolute monarchy , serving
nascent bourgeois society as a mighty weapon in its struggle against feudalism. Still,
its develo pment remained clogged by all manner of medieval rubbish, seignorial
rights, local privileges, municipal and guild monopolies, and provincial constitutions.
The gigantic broom of the French Revolution of the 18th century swept away all these
relics of bygone times, thus clearing simultaneously the social soil of its last
hindrances to the superstructure of the modern state edifice raised under the First
Empire, itself the offspring of the coalition wars of old semi-feudal Euro pe against
modern France.
During the subsequent regimes, the government, placed under parliamentary control –
that is, under the direct control of the propertied classes – became not only a hotbed of
huge natio nal debts  and crushing taxes; with its irresistible allurements of place, pelf,
and patronage, it became not only the bone of contention between the rival factions
and adve nturers of the ruling classes; but its political character changed
simultaneously with the economic changes of society . At the same pace at which the
progress of modern industry develop ed, widened, intensified the class antagonism
between capital and labor , the state power assumed more and more the character of
the national power of capital over labor , of a public force organized for social
enslavement, of an engine of class despotism.
After every revolu tion marking a progressive phase in the class struggle,  the purely
repressive character of the state power stands out in bolder and bolder relief. The
Revolution of 1830, resulting in the transfer of government from the landl ords to the
capitalists, transferred it from the more remote to the more direct antagonists of the
working men. The bourgeois republicans, who, in the name of the February
86Revolution, took the state power , used it for the June [1848] massacres, in order to
convince the working class that “social” republic means the republic entrusting their
social subjection, and in order to convince the royalist bulk of the bourgeois and
landlord class that they might safely leave the cares and emoluments of government to
the bour geois “republicans.”
However , after their one heroic exploit of June, the bourgeois republicans had, from
the front, to fall back to the rear of the “Party of Order” – a combination formed by all
the rival fractions and factions of the appropriating classes. The proper form of their
joint-stock governm ent was the parliamentary republic, with Louis Bonaparte for its
president. Theirs was a regime of avowed class terrorism and deliberate insult towards
the “vile multitude.”
If the parliamentary republic, as M. Thiers said, “divided them [the differen t fractions
of the ruling class] least,” it opened an abyss between that class and the whole body of
society outside their spare ranks. The restraints by which their own divisions had
under former regimes still checked the state power , were removed by their union; and
in view of the threatening upheaval of the proletariat, they now used that state power
mercilessly and ostentatiously as the national war engine of capital against labor .
In their uninterrup ted crusade against the producing masses, they were, however ,
bound not only to invest the executive with continually increased powers of
repression, but at the same time to divest their own parliamentary strong hold – the
National Assembly – one by one, of all its own means of defence against the
Executive. The Executive, in the person of Louis Bonaparte, turned them out. The
natural of fspring of the “Party of Order” republic was the Second Empire.
The empi re, with the coup d’état for its birth certificate, universal suffrage for its
sanction, and the sword for its sceptre , professed to rest upon the peasantry , the large
mass of producers not directly involved in the struggle of capital and labor . It
professed to save the working class by breaking down parliamentarism, and, with it,
the undisguised subserviency of gove rnment to the propertied classes. It professed to
save the propertied classes by uphold ing their economic supremacy over the working
class; and, finally , it professed to unite all classes by reviving for all the chimera of
national glory .
In reality , it was the only form of government possible at a time when the bourgeoisie
had already lost, and the working class had not yet acquired, the faculty of ruling the
nation. It was accla imed throughout the world as the savior of society . Under its sway ,
bourgeois society , freed from politica l cares, attained a development unexp ected even
by itself. Its industry and commerce expanded to colossal dimensions; financial
swindling celebrate d cosmopolitan orgies; the misery of the masses was set off by a
shameless display of gorgeous, mere tricious and debased luxury . The state power ,
apparently soaring high above society and the very hotbed of all its corruptions. Its
own rottenness, and the rottenness of the society it had saved, were laid bare by the
bayonet of Prussia , herself eagerly bent upon transferring the supreme seat of that
regime from Paris to Berlin. Imperial ism is, at the same time, the most prostitute and
the ultimate form of the state power which nascent bourgeois society had commenced
to elaborate as a means of its own emancipation from feudalism, and which full-
87grown bourgeois society had finally transformed into a means for the enslavement of
labor by capital.
The direc t antithes is to the empire was the Commune. The cry of “social republic,”
with whic h the February [1848] Revolution was ushered in by the Paris proletariat,
did but express a vague aspiration after a republic that was not only to supercede the
monarchical form of class rule, but class rule itself. The Commune was the positive
form of that republic.
Paris, the central seat of the old governmental power , and, at the same time, the social
stronghold of the French working class, had risen in arms against the attempt of
Thiers and the Rurals to restore and perpetuate that old governmen tal power
bequeathed to them by the empire. Paris could resist only because, in consequence of
the siege, it had got rid of the army , and replaced it by a National Guard, the bulk of
which consisted of working men. This fact was now to be transformed into an