commodity over its cost-price; and it remains a mystery where this surplus  originated
– from the exploitation of labour in the process of production, or from outwitting the
purchaser in the process of circulat ion, or from both. What is also given is the
proportion of this surplus to the value of the total capital, or the rate of profit. The
calculation of this excess of the selling price over the cost-price in relation to the
value of the advanced total capital is very important and natural, because in effect it
yields the ratio in which total capital has been expanded, i.e., the degree of its self-
expansion. If we proceed from this rate of profit, we cannot therefore conclude the
specific relations between the surplus and the portion of capital invested in wages. We
shall see in a subse quent chapter what amusing somersaults Malthus makes when he
tries in this way to get at the secret of the surplus-value and of its specific relation to
the variable part of the capital. What the rate of profit actually shows is rather a
uniform relation of the surplus to equal portions of the total capital, which, from this
point of view , does not show any inner difference at all, unless it be between the fixed
and circulating capital. And it shows this difference, too, only because the surplus is
calculated in two ways; namely , first, as a simple magnitude – as excess over the cost-
price. In this, its initial, form, the entire circulating capital goes into the cost-price,
while of the fixed capital only the wear and tear goes into it. Second, the relation of
this excess in value  to the total value of the advanced capital. In this case, the value of
the total fixed capital enters into the calculation, quite the same as the circulating
capital. Therefore, the circulating capital goes in both times in the same way, while
the fixed capital goes in differently the first time, and in the same way as circulating
capital the second time. Under the circumstances the difference between  fixed and
circulating capital is the only one which obtrudes itself.
If, as Hegel would put it, the surplus therefore re-reflects itself in itself out of the rate
of profit, or, put differently , the surplus is more closely characterised by the rate of
profit, it appears as a surplus produced by capital above its own value over a year, or
in a given period of circulation.
Although the rate of profit thus differs numerically from the rate of surplus-value,
while surplus-valu e and profit are actually the same thing and numerically equal,
profit is nevertheless a converted form of surplus-value, a form in which its origin and
182the secret of its existence are obscured and extinguished. In effect, profit is the form in
which surplus-value presents itself to the view , and must initially be stripped by
analysis to disclose  the latter . In surplus-value, the relation between capital and labour
is laid bare; in the relation of capita l to profit, i.e., of capital to surplus-value that
appears on the one hand as an excess over the cost-price of commodities realised in
the process of circulation and, on the other , as a surplus more closely determined by
its relation to the total capital, the capital  appears as a relation to itself , a relation in
which it, as the original sum of value, is distinguished from a new value which it
generated. One is conscious that capital generates this new value by its movement in
the processes of production and circulation. But the way in which this occurs is
cloaked in mystery  and appears to originate from hidden qualities inheren t in capital
itself.
The further we follow the process of the self-expansion of capital, the more
mysterious the relations of capital will become, and the less the secret of its internal
organism will be revealed.
In this part, the rate of profit is numerically different from the rate of surplus-value;
while profit and surplus-value are treated as having the same numerical magnitude but
only a different form. In the next part we shall see how the alienation goes further , and
how profit represents a magnitude dif fering also numerically from surplus-value.