individuals. Thus the first fact to be established is the physical organisation of these
individuals and their consequent relation to the rest of nature. Of course, we cannot
here go either into the actual physical nature of man, or into the natural conditions in
which man finds himself - geological, hydrographical, climatic and so on. The writing
19of history must always set out from these natural bases and their modifica tion in the
course of history through the action of men.
Men can be distinguished from animals by consciousness, by religion or anything else
you like. They themselves begin to distinguish themselves from animals as soon as
they begin  to produce their means of subsistence, a step which is condition ed by their
physical organisation. By producing their means of subsistence men are indirectly
producing their actual material life.
The way in which men produce their means of subsistence depends first of all on the
nature of the actual means of subsistence they find in existence and have to reproduce.
This mode of production must not be considered simply as being the produc tion of the
physical existence of the individuals.  Rather it is a definite form of activity of these
individuals, a definite form of expre ssing their life, a definite mode of life on their
part. As individuals express their life, so they are. What they are, therefore, coincides
with their production, both with what they produce and with how they produce. The
nature of individuals thus depends on the material conditions determining their
production.
This production only makes its appearance with the increase of population. In its turn
this presupposes the intercourse [Verkehr ] of indiv iduals with one another . The form
of this intercourse is again determined by production.
[3. Production and Intercourse.
Division of Labour and Forms of Property - Tribal, Ancient,
Feudal]
The relations of different nations among themselves depend upon the extent to which
each has developed its productive forces, the division of labour and internal
intercourse. This statement is general ly recognised. But not only the relation of one
nation to others, but also the whole internal structure of the nation itself depends on
the stage of devel opment reached by its production and its internal and external
intercourse. How far the productive forces of a nation are developed is shown most
manifestly by the degree to which the division of labour has been carried.  Each new
productive force, insofar as it is not merely a quantitative extension of productive
forces already know n (for instance the bringing into cultivation of fresh land), causes
a further development of the division of labour .
The division of labour inside a nation leads at first to the separation of industrial and
commercial from agricultural labour , and hence to the separation of town and country
and to the conflict of their interests. Its further development leads to the separation of
commercial from industrial labour . At the same time through the division of labour
inside these various branches there develop various divisions among the individuals
co-operating in definite kinds of labour . The relative position of these individual
groups is determined by the methods employed in agriculture, industry and commerce
(patriarchalism, slavery , estates, class es). These same conditions are to be seen (given
a more developed intercourse) in the relations of dif ferent nations to one another .
20The various stages of development in the division of labour are just so many different
forms of ownership , i.e. the existing stage in the division of labour determin es also the
relations of individuals to one another with reference to the material, instrument, and
product of labour .
The first form of ownership is tribal  [Stammeigentum ] ownersh ip. It corresponds to
the undeveloped stage of production,  at which a people lives by hunting and fishing,
by the rearing of beasts or, in the highest stage, agriculture. In the latter case it
presupposes a great mass of uncultivated stretches of land. The division of labour is at
this stage  still very elementary and is confined to a further extension of the natural
division of labour existing in the family . The social structure is, therefore, limited to
an extension of the family; patriarchal family chieftains, below them the members of
the tribe, finally slaves. The slavery latent in the family only develops gradually with
the increase of population, the growth of wants, and with the extension of external
relations, both of war and of barter .
The second form is the ancient communal and State ownership which proceeds
especially from the union of several tribes into a city by agreement or by conquest,
and which is still accompanied by slavery . Beside communal ownership we already
find movable, and later also immovable, private property developing, but as an
abnormal form subordinate to comm unal ownership. The citizens hold power over
their labouring slaves only in their community , and on this account alone, therefore,
they are bound to the form of communal ownership. It is the commu nal private
property which compels the active citizens to remain in this spontaneously derived
form of association  over against their slaves. For this reason the whole structure of
society based on this communal ownership, and with it the power of the people,
decays in the same measure as, in particular , immovable private property evolves. The
division of labour is already more developed. We already find the antagonism of town
and country; later the antagonism between those states which represent town interests
and those  which represent country interests, and inside the towns themselves the
antagonism between industry and maritime commerce. The class relation between
citizens and slaves is now completely developed.
With the developm ent of private property , we find here for the first time the same
conditions which we shall find again, only on a more extensive scale, with modern
private property . On the one hand, the concentration of private property , which began
very early in Rome (as the Licinian agrarian law proves) and proceeded very rapidly
from the time of the civil wars and especially under the Emperors; on the other hand,
coupled with this, the transformation of the plebeian small peasantry into a proletariat,
which, however , owing to its interm ediate position between propertied citizens and
slaves, never achieved an independent development.
The third form of ownership is feudal or estate property . If antiquity starte d out from
the town and its little territory , the Middle Ages started out from the country . This
different starting-p oint was determined by the sparseness of the population at that
time, which was scattered over a large area and which received no large increase from
the conquerors. In contrast to Greece and Rome, feudal development at the outset,
therefore, extends over a much wider territory , prepared by the Roman conquests and
21the spread of agriculture at first associated with it. The last centuries of the declining
Roman Empire and its conquest by the barbarians destroyed a number of productive
forces; agriculture had declined, indus try had decayed for want of a market , trade had
died out or been violently suspended, the rural and urban population had decreased.
From these conditi ons and the mode  of organisation of the conquest determined by
them, feudal property developed under the influence of the German ic military
constitution. Like tribal and commun al ownership, it is based again on a community;
but the directly producing class standing over against it is not, as in the case of the
ancient community , the slaves, but the enserfed small peasantry . As soon as feudalism
is fully developed, there also arise s antagonism to the towns. The hierarchical
structure of land ownership, and the armed bodies of retainers associated with it, gave
the nobili ty power  over the serfs. This feudal organisation was, just as much as the
ancient communal ownership, an association against a subjected producing class; but
the form of association and the relation to the direct producers were different because
of the dif ferent conditions of production.
This feudal system of land ownership had its counterpart in the towns  in the shape of
corporative property , the feudal organisation of trades. Here property consisted chiefly
in the labour of each individual person. The necessity for association against the
organised robber -nobility , the need for communal covered markets in an age when the
industrialist was at the same time a merchant, the growing competition of the escaped
serfs swarming into the rising towns, the feudal structure of the whole country: these
combined to bring about the guilds . The gradually accumulated small capital of
individual craftsmen and their stable numbers, as against the growing population,
evolved the relatio n of journeyman and apprentice, which brought into being in the
towns a hierarchy similar to that in the country .
Thus the chief form of property during the feudal epoch consisted on the one hand of
landed property with serf labour chained to it, and on the other of the labour of the
individual with small capital commanding the labour of journeymen. The organisation
of both was determined by the restricted conditions of production - the small-scale
and primitive cultivation of the land, and the craft type of industry . There was little
division of labour in the heyday of feudalism. Each country bore in itself the
antithesis of town and country; the division into estates was certainly strongly
marked; but apart from the differentiation of princes, nobility , clergy and peasants in
the country , and masters, journeymen , apprentices and soon also the rabble of casual
labourers in the towns, no division of importance took place. In agriculture it was