confine ourselves to saying that these or those ideas were dominant at a given time,
without bothering ourselves about the conditions of production and the producers of
these ideas, if we thus ignore the individuals and world conditions which are the
source of the ideas, we can say, for instance, that during the time that the aristocracy
was dominant, the concepts honour , loyalty , etc. were dominant, during the
dominance of the bourgeoisie the concepts freedom, equality , etc. The ruling class
itself on the whole imagines this to be so. This conception of history , which is
common to all historians, particularly since the eighteenth century , will necessarily
come up against the phenomenon that increasingly abstract ideas hold sway , i.e. ideas
which increasingly  take on the form of universality . For each new class which puts
itself in the place of one ruling before it, is compelled, merely in order to carry
through its aim, to represent its interest as the common interest of all the members of
society , that is, expressed in ideal form: it has to give its ideas the form of universality ,
and repre sent them as the only rational, universally valid ones. The class making a
revolution appears from the very start, if only because it is opposed to a class, not as a
39class but as the representative of the whole of society; it appears as the whole mass of
society confronting the one ruling class. ‘ -
Marginal note by Marx : Universality corresponds to (1) the class versus the estate, (2)
the competition, world-wide intercourse, etc., (3) the great numerical strength of the
ruling class, (4) the illusion of the common interests (in the beginning this illusion is
true), (5) the delusion of the ideologists and the division of labour .
 - It can do this because, to start with, its interest really is more connected  with the
common interest of all other non-rulin g classes, because under the pressure  of hitherto
existing conditions its interest has not yet been able to develop as the particular
interest of a particular class. Its victo ry, therefore, benefits also many individuals of
the other classes which are not winn ing a dominant position, but only insofar as it
now puts these individuals in a position to raise themselves into the ruling class.
When the French bourgeoisie overthrew the power of the aristocracy , it thereby made
it possibl e for many proletarians to raise themselves above the proletariat, but only
insofar as they become bourgeois. Every new class, therefore, achieves its hegemony
only on a broader basis than that of the class ruling previously , whereas the opposition
of the non-ruling class against the new ruling class later develops all the more sharply
and profoundly . Both these things determine the fact that the struggle to be waged
against this new ruling class, in its turn, aims at a more decided and radic al negation
of the previous conditions of society than could all previous classes which  sought to
rule.
This whole semblance, that the rule of a certain class is only the rule of certain ideas,
comes to a natural end, of course, as soon as class rule in general ceases to be the
form in which society is organised, that is to say, as soon as it is no longer necessary
to represent a particular interest as general or the ‘general interest’  as ruling.
Once the ruling ideas have been separated from the ruling individuals and, above all,
from the relationsh ips which result from a given stage of the mode of production, and
in this way the conclusion has been reached that history is always under the sway of
ideas, it is very easy to abstract from these various ideas ‘the idea,’  the notion, etc. as
the dominant force in history , and thus to understand all these separate  ideas and
concepts as ‘forms of self-determina tion’ on the part of the concept developing in
history . It follows then naturally , too, that all the relationships of men can be derived
from the concept of man, man as conceived, the essence of man, Man. This has been
done by the specu lative philosopher s. Hegel himself confesses at the end of the
Geschichtsphilosophie  that he ‘has consi dered the progress of the concept only’  and
has represented in history the ‘true theodicy .’ (p.446.) Now one can go back again to
the producers of the ‘concept,’  to the theorists, ideologists and philosophers, and one
comes then to the conclusion that the philosophers, the thinkers as such, have at all
times been dominant in history: a conclusion, as we see, already expressed  by Hegel.
The whol e trick of proving the hegemony of the spirit in history (hierarc hy Stirner
calls it) is thus confined to the following three ef forts.
No. 1. One must separate the ideas  of those ruling for empirical reasons, under
empirical condition s and as empirica l individuals, from these actual rulers, and thus
recognise the rule of ideas or illusions in history .
40No. 2. One must bring an order into this rule of ideas, prove a mystical connection
among the successive ruling ideas, which is managed by understanding them as ‘acts
of self-de termination on the part of the concept’  (this is possible because by virtue of
their empirical basis these ideas are really connected with one another and because,
conceived as mere ideas, they become self-distinctions, distinctions made by thought).
No. 3. To remove the mystical appearance of this ‘self-determining concept’  it is
changed into a person - ‘Self-Consciousness’  - or, to appear thoroughly materialistic,
into a series of persons, who represent the ‘concept’  in history , into the ‘thinkers,’  the
‘philosophers,’  the ideologists, who again are understood as the manuf acturers of
history , as the ‘council of guardians,’  as the rulers. Thus the whole body of
materialistic eleme nts has been removed from history and now full rein can be given
to the speculative steed.
Whilst in ordinary life every shopkeep er is very well able to distinguish between what
somebody professe s to be and what he really is, our historians have not yet won even
this trivial insight. They take every epoch at its word and believe that everything it
says and imagines about itself is true.
This historical method which reigned in Germany , and especially the reason why,
must be understood from its connectio n with the illusion of ideologists in general, e.g.
the illusio ns of the jurist, politicians (of the practical statesmen among them, too),
from the dogmatic  dreamings and distortions of these fellows; this is explained
perfectly easily from their practical position in life, their job, and the division of
labour .
C. The Real Basis of Ideology
Division of Labour: Town and Country
[Four pages of the manuscript are missing here.]  From the first there follows the
premise of a highly developed division of labour and an extensive comm erce; from
the second, the locality. In the first case the individuals must be brought together; in
the second they find themselves alongside the given instrument of production as
instruments of production themselves. Here, therefore, arises the differenc e between
natural instruments of production and those created by civilisation. The field (water ,
etc.) can be regarded as a natural instrument of production. In the first case, that of the
natural instrument of production, individuals are subservient to nature; in the second,
to a product of labour . In the first case, therefore, property (landed property) appears
as direct natural domination, in the second, as domination of labour , particularly of
accumulated labour , capital. The first case presupposes that the individuals  are united
by some bond: family , tribe, the land itself, etc.; the second, that they are independent
of one another and are only held together by exchange. In the first case, what is
involved is chiefly an exchange between men and nature in which the labour of the
former is exchanged for the products  of the latter; in the second, it is predominantly
an exchange of men among themselves. In the first case, average, human common
sense is adequate - physical activity is as yet not separated from mental activity; in the
second, the division between physical and mental labour must already be practically
41completed. In the first case, the domination of the proprietor over the propertyless
may be based on a personal relationship, on a kind of community; in the second, it
must have  taken on a material shape in a third party - money . In the first case, small
industry exists, but determined by the utilisation of the natural instrument of
production and therefore without the distribution of labour among various individuals;
in the second, industry exists only in and through the division of labour .
[2. The Division of Material and Mental Labour.
Separation of Town and Country, The Guild System]
The greatest division of material and mental labour is the separation of town and
country . The antagonism between town and country begins with the transition from
barbarism to civilisation, from tribe to State, from locality to nation, and runs through
the whole history of civilisation to the present day (the Anti-Corn Law League).
The existence of the town implies, at the same time, the necessity of administration,
police, taxes, etc.; in short, of the municipality , and thus of politics in general. Here
first became manifest the division of the population into two great classes, which is
directly based on the division of labour and on the instruments of production. The
town already is in actual fact the conc entration of the population, of the instruments of
production, of capital, of pleasures, of needs, while the country demonstrates just the
opposite fact, isola tion and separation. The antagonism between town and country can
only exist within the framework of private property . It is the most crass expression of
the subjection of the individual under the division of labour , under a definite activity