only have a ‘world-historical’  existence. World-historical existence of individuals
means existence of individuals which is directly linked up with world history .
Communism is for us not a state of affairs  which is to be established, an ideal  to
which reality [will] have to adjust itself. We call communism the real movement
which abolishes the present state of things. The conditions of this movement result
from the premises now in existence.
In the main we have so far consid ered only one aspect of human activity , the
reshaping  of nature by men. The other aspect, the reshaping  of men by men ...
[Intercourse and productive power]
Origin of the state and the relation of the state to civil society . ...
B. The Illusion of the Epoch
Civil Society and the Conception of History
The form of intercourse determined by the existing productive forces at all previous
historical stages, and in its turn determining these, is civil society . The latter , as is
clear from what we have said above, has as its premises and basis the simple family
and the multiple, the so-called tribe, the more precise determinants of this society are
enumerated in our remarks above. Already here we see how this civil society is the
true source and theatre of all history , and how absurd is the conception of history held
hitherto, which neglects the real relationships and confines itself to high-sounding
dramas of princes and states.
Civil society embraces the whole material intercourse of individuals within a definite
stage of the development of productive forces. It embraces the whole commercial and
industrial life of a given stage and, insofar , transcends the State and the nation,
though, on the other hand again, it must assert itself in its foreign relations as
nationality , and inwardly must organise itself as State. The word ‘civil society’
[bürgerliche Gesellschaft ] emer ged in the eighteenth century , when property
relationships had already extricated themselves from the ancient and medieval
communal society . Civil society as such only develops with the bourgeoisie; the social
organisation evolving directly out of production and commerce, which in all ages
forms the basis of the State and of the rest of the idealistic superstru cture, has,
however , always been designated by the same name.
Conclusions from the Materialist Conception of History
History is nothing but the succession of the separate generations, each of which
exploits the materials, the capital funds, the productive forces handed down  to it by all
31preceding generatio ns, and thus, on the one hand, continues the traditional activity in
completely change d circumstances and, on the other , modifies the old circumstances
with a completely changed activity . This can be speculatively distorted so that later
history is made the goal of earlier history , e.g. the goal ascribed to the discovery of
America is to further the eruption of the French Revolution. Thereby history receives
its own special aims and becomes ‘a person rating with other persons’  (to wit: ‘Self-
Consciousness, Criticism, the Unique,’  etc.), while what is designated with the words
‘destiny ,’ ‘goal,’  ‘germ,’  or ‘idea’  of earlier history is nothing more than an abstraction
formed from later history , from the active influence which earlier history exercises on
later history .
The further the separate spheres, which interact on one another , extend in the course
of this developmen t, the more the original isolation of the separate nationalities is
destroyed by the developed mode of production and intercourse and the division of
labour between various nations naturally brought forth by these, the more history
becomes world history . Thus, for instance, if in England a machine is invented, which
deprives countless workers of bread in India and China, and overturns the whole form
of existence of these empires, this invention becomes a world-historical fact. Or again,
take the case of sugar and coffee whic h have proved their world-historical importance
in the nineteenth century by the fact that the lack of these products, occasioned by the
Napoleonic Contin ental System, caused the Germans to rise against Napoleon, and
thus became the real basis of the glorious Wars of liberation of 1813. From this it
follows that this transformation of history into world history is not indeed a mere
abstract act on the part of the ‘self-c onsciousness,’  the world spirit, or of any other
metaphysical spect re, but a quite material, empirically verifiable act, an act the proof
of which every individual furnishes as he comes and goes, eats, drinks and clothes
himself.
[7. Summary of the Materialist Conception of History]
This conc eption of history depends on our ability to expound the real process of
production, starting  out from the material production of life itself, and to comprehend
the form of interco urse connected with this and created by this mode of production
(i.e. civil society in its various stages), as the basis of all history; and to show it in its
action as State, to explain all the different theoretical products and forms of
consciousness, religion, philosophy , ethics, etc. etc. and trace their origins and growth
from that basis; by which means, of course, the whole thing can be depicted in its
totality (and therefore, too, the reciprocal action of these various sides on one
another). It has not, like the idealistic view of history , in every period to look for a
category , but remains constantly on the real ground of history; it does not explain
practice from the idea but explains the formation of ideas from material practice; and
accordingly it comes to the conclusion that all forms and products of consciousness
cannot be dissolved by mental critic ism, by resolution into ‘self-consciousness’  or
transformation into ‘apparitions,’  ‘spectres,’  ‘fancies,’  etc. but only by the practical
overthrow of the actual social relations which gave rise to this idealistic humbug; that
not criticism but revolution is the driving force of history , also of religion, of
philosophy and all other types of theory . It shows that history does not end by being
32resolved into ‘self-consciousness as spirit of the spirit,’  but that in it at each stage
there is found a material result: a sum of productive forces, an historically created
relation of individu als to nature and to one another , which is handed down to each
generation from its predecessor; a mass of productive forces, capital funds and
conditions, which, on the one hand, is indeed modified by the new gene ration, but
also on the other prescribes for it its conditions of life and gives it a definite
development, a special character . It shows that circumstances make men just as much
as men make circumstances.
This sum of productive forces, capital funds and social forms of intercou rse, which
every individual and generation finds in existence as something given, is the real basis
of what the philosophers have conceived as ‘substance’  and ‘essence of man,’  and
what they have deified and attacked; a real basis which is not in the least disturbed, in
its effect and influence on the development of men, by the fact that these philosophers
revolt against it as ‘self-consciousness’  and the ‘Unique.’  These conditio ns of life,
which different generations find in existence, decide also whether or not the
periodically recurring revolutionary convulsion will be strong enough to overthrow
the basis of the entire existing system. And if these material elements of a complete
revolution are not present (namely , on the one hand the existing productive forces, on
the other the form ation of a revolu tionary mass, which revolts not only against
separate conditions  of society up till then, but against the very ‘production of life’ till
then, the ‘total activity’  on which it was based), then, as far as practical development
is concerned, it is absolutely immater ial whether the idea of this revolution has been
expressed a hundred times already , as the history of communism proves.
[8. The Inconsistency of the Idealist Conception of History in
General, and of German Post-Hegelian Philosophy in
Particular]
In the whole conception of history up to the present this real basis of history has either
been totally neglected or else considered as a minor matter quite irrelevant to the
course of history . History must, therefore, always be written according to an
extraneous standard; the real production of life seems to be primeval history , while the
truly historical appears to be separated from ordinary life, something extra-
superterrestrial. With this the relation of man to nature is excluded from history and
hence the antithesis of nature and history is created. The exponents of this conception
of history have consequently only been able to see in history the political actions of
princes and States, religious and all sorts of theoretical struggles, and in particular in
each historical epoch have had to share the illusion of that epoch. For instance, if an
epoch imagines itself to be actuated by purely ‘political’  or ‘religious’  motives,
although ‘religion’  and ‘politics’  are only forms of its true motives, the historian
accepts this opinion. The ‘idea,’  the ‘conception’  of the people in question about their
real pract ice, is transformed into the sole determining, active force, which controls
and deter mines their practice. When the crude form in which the division of labour
appears with the Indians and Egyptians calls forth the caste-system in their State and
33religion, the historian believes that the caste-system is the power which has produced
this crude social form.
While the French and the English at least hold by the political illusion, which is
moderately close to reality , the Germ ans move in the realm of the ‘pure spirit,’  and
make religious illusion the driving force of history . The Hegelian philosophy of