The bourgeoisie keeps more and more doing away with the scattered state of the
population, of the means of produ ction, and of property . It has agglomerated
population, centralised the means of production, and has concentrated property in a
few hands. The necessary consequence of this was political centralisation.
Independent, or but loosely connected provinces, with separate interests, laws,
governments, and systems of taxation , became lumped together into one nation, with
one government, one code of laws, one national class-interest, one frontier , and one
customs-tarif f.
The bourgeoisie, during its rule of scarce one hundred years, has created more
massive and more colossal producti ve forces than have all preceding generations
together . Subjection of Nature’ s forces to man, machinery , application of chemistry to
industry and agriculture, steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, clearing of
whole continents for cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations conjured
out of the ground – what earlier century had even a presentiment that such productive
forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?
We see then: the means of production and of exchange, on whose foundation the
bourgeoisie built itself up, were gene rated in feudal society . At a certain stage in the
development of these means of production and of exchange, the conditions under
which feudal society produced and exchanged, the feudal organisation of agriculture
and manufacturing industry , in one word, the feudal relations of property became no
longer compatible with the already developed productive forces; they became so
many fetters. They had to be burst asunder; they were burst asunder .
Into their place stepped free competition, accompanied by a social and political
constitution adapted in it, and the economic and political sway of the bour geois class.
A similar movement is going on befor e our own eyes. Modern bourgeois society , with
its relatio ns of production, of exchang e and of property , a society that has conjured up
such gigantic mean s of production and of exchange, is like the sorcerer who is no
longer able to control the powers of the nether world whom he has called up by his
66spells. For many a decade past the history of industry and commerce is but the history
of the revolt of modern productive forces against modern conditions of production,
against the property  relations that are the conditions for the existence of the bourgeois
and of its rule. It is enough to mention the commercial crises that by their periodical
return put the existence of the entire bourgeois society on its trial, each time more
threateningly . In these crises, a great part not only of the existing products, but also of
the previo usly created productive forces, are periodically destroyed. In these crises,
there breaks out an epidemic that, in all earlier epochs, would have seemed an
absurdity – the epidemic of over-production. Society suddenly finds itself put back
into a state of momentary barbarism; it appears as if a famine, a universal war of
devastation, had cut off the supply of every means of subsistence; industry and
commerce seem to be destroyed; and why? Because there is too much civilisation, too
much means of subsistence, too much industry , too much commerce. The productive
forces at the dispo sal of society no longer tend to further the developm ent of the
conditions of bourgeois property; on the contrary , they have become too powerful for
these conditions, by which they are fettered, and so soon as they overcome these
fetters, they bring disorder into the whole of bourgeois society , endanger the existence
of bourgeois property . The conditions  of bourgeois society are too narrow to comprise
the wealth created by them. And how does the bourgeoisie get over these crises? On
the one hand by enforced destruction of a mass of productive forces; on the other , by
the conquest of new markets, and by the more thorough exploitation of the old ones.
That is to say, by paving the way for more extensive and more destructive crises, and
by diminishing the means whereby crises are prevented.
The weap ons with which the bourgeoisie felled feudalism to the groun d are now
turned against the bour geoisie itself.
But not only has the bourgeoisie forged the weapons that bring death to itself; it has
also called into existence the men who are to wield those weapons – the modern
working class – the proletarians.
In proportion as the bourgeoisie, i.e., capital, is developed, in the same proportion is
the proletariat, the modern working class, developed – a class of labourer s, who live
only so long as they find work, and who find work only so long as their labour
increases capital. These labourers, who must sell themselves piecem eal, are a
commodity , like every other article of commerce, and are consequently exposed to all
the vicissitudes of competition, to all the fluctuations of the market.
Owing to the exten sive use of machi nery, and to the division of labour , the work of
the proletarians has lost all individual character , and, consequently , all charm for the
workman. He becomes an appendage of the machine, and it is only the most simple,
most monotonous, and most easily acquired knack, that is required of him. Hence, the
cost of production  of a workman is restricted, almost entirely , to the means of
subsistence that he requires for maintenance, and for the propagation of his race. But
the price of a commodity , and therefore also of labour , is equal to its cost of
production. In proportion, therefore, as the repulsiveness of the work increases, the
wage decreases. Nay more, in proportion as the use of machinery and division of
labour increases, in the same proportion the burden of toil also increases, whether by
67prolongation of the working hours, by the increase of the work exacted in a given time
or by increased speed of machinery , etc.
Modern Industry has converted the little workshop of the patriarchal mast er into the
great factory of the industrial capitalist. Masses of labourers, crowded into the factory ,
are organised like soldiers. As privates of the industrial army they are placed under the
command of a perfect hierarchy of officers and sergeants. Not only are they slaves of
the bourgeois class , and of the bourgeois State; they are daily and hourly enslaved by
the machine, by the overlooker , and, above all, by the individual bourgeois
manufacturer hims elf. The more openly this despotism proclaims gain to be its end
and aim, the more petty , the more hateful and the more embittering it is.
The less the skill and exertion of strength implied in manual labour , in other words,
the more modern industry becomes  developed, the more is the labour of men
superseded by that of women. Differences of age and sex have no longer any
distinctive social validity for the work ing class. All are instruments of labour , more or
less expensive to use, according to their age and sex.
No sooner is the exploitation of the labourer by the manufacturer , so far, at an end,
that he receives his wages in cash, than he is set upon by the other portions of the
bourgeoisie, the landlord, the shopkeeper , the pawnbroker , etc.
The lower strata of the bourgeoisie – the small tradespeople, shopkeepers, and retired
tradesmen generally , the handicraftsm en and peasants – all these sink gradually into
the proletariat, partly because their diminutive capital does not suffice for the scale on
which Modern Industry is carried on, and is swamped in the competition with the
large capitalists, partly because their specialised skill is rendered worthle ss by new
methods of production. Thus the proletariat is recruited from all classes of the
population.
The prole tariat goes through various stages of development. With its birth begins its
struggle with the bourgeoisie. At first the contest is carried on by individual  labourers,
then by the workpeople of a factory , then by the operative of one trade, in one locality ,
against the individual bourgeois who directly exploits them. They direct their attacks
not again st the bourgeois conditions of production, but against the instruments of
production themse lves; they destroy imported wares that compete with their labour ,
they smas h to pieces machinery , they set factories ablaze, they seek to resto re by force
the vanished status of the workman of the Middle Ages.
At this stage, the labourers still form an incoherent mass scattered over the whole
country , and broken up by their mutual competition. If anywhere they unite to form
more compact bodies, this is not yet the consequence of their own active union, but of
the union of the bourgeoisie, which class, in order to attain its own politic al ends, is
compelled to set the whole proletariat  in motion, and is moreover yet, for a time, able
to do so. At this stage, therefore, the proletarians do not fight their enemies, but the
enemies of their enemies, the remnants of absolute monarchy , the landowners, the
non-industrial bourgeois, the petty bourgeois. Thus, the whole historical movement is
concentrated in the hands of the bourgeoisie; every victory so obtained is a victory for
the bour geoisie.
68But with the development of industry , the proletariat not only increases in number; it
becomes concentra ted in greater masses, its strength grows, and it feels that strength
more. The various interests and cond itions of life within the ranks of the proletariat
are more and more  equalised, in propo rtion as machinery obliterates all distinctions of
labour , and nearly everywhere reduces wages to the same low level. The growing
competition among the bourgeois, and the resulting commercial crises, make the
wages of the workers ever more fluctuating. The increasing impro vement of
machinery , ever more rapidly developing, makes their livelihood more and more
precarious; the collisions between individual workmen and individual bourgeois take