shillings. One pound of yarn would, therefore, cost sixpence in the one case, and three
shillings in the other . The difference of price would result from the difference in the
productive powers of labour employed. One hour of labour would be realized in one
pound of yarn with the greater produ ctive power , while with the smaller productive
power , six hours of labour would be realized in one pound of yarn. The price of a
pound of yarn would, in the one instance, be only sixpence, although wages were
relatively high and the rate of profi t low; it would be three shillings in the other
instance, although wages were low and the rate of profit high. This would be so
because the price of the pound of yarn is regulated by the total amount of labour
worked up in it, and not by the proportional division of that total amount into paid
and unpaid labour . The fact I have mentioned before that high-price labour may
produce cheap, and low-priced labour may produce dear commodities, loses,
therefore, its paradoxical appearance.  It is only the expression of the general law that
the value of a commodity is regulated by the quantity of labour worked up in it, and
149the the quantity of labour worked up in it depends altogether upon the productive
powers of labour employed, and will therefore, vary with every variation in the
productivity of labour .
XIII. Main Cases of Attem pts at Raising Wages or Resisting
their Fall
Let us now seriously consider the main cases in which a rise of wages is attempted or
a reduction of wages resisted.
1. We have  seen that the value of the labouring power , or in more popula r parlance,
the value of labour , is deter mined by the value of necessaries, or the quantity of
labour required to produce them.
If, then, in a given  country the value of the daily average necessaries of the labourer
represented six hours of labour expressed in three shillings, the labourer would have
to work six hours daily to produce an equivalent for this daily maintenance. If the
whole working day was twelve hours, the capitalist would pay him the value of his
labour by paying him three shillings. Half the working day would be unpaid labour ,
and the rate of profit would amount to 100 percent. But now suppose that, consequent
upon a decrease of productivity , more labour should be wanted to produce, say, the
same amount of agricultural produce, so that the price of the average daily necessaries
should rise from three to four shillings. In that case the value  of labour would rise by
one third,  or 33 1/3 percent. Eight hours of the working day would be required to
produce an equivalent for the daily maintenance of the labourer , according  to his old
standard of living. The surplus labour would therefore sink from six hours to four, and
the rate of profit from 100 to 50 percent. But in insisting upon a rise of wages, the
labourer would only insist upon getting the increased value of his labour , like every
other seller of a commodity , who, the costs of his commodities having increased, tries
to get its increased value paid. If wages did not rise, or not sufficiently rise, to
compensate for the increased values of necessaries, the price  of labour would sink
below the value of labour , and the labourer's standard of life would deteriorate.
But a change migh t also take place in an opposite direction. By virtue of the increased
productivity of labour , the same amount of the average daily necessaries might sink
from three to two shillings, or only four hours out of the working day, instead of six,
be wante d to reproduce an equivale nt for the value of the daily necess aries. The
working man would now be able to buy with two shillings as many necessaries as he
did befor e with three shillings. Indeed, the value of labour  would have sunk, but
diminished value would command the same amount of commodities as before. Then
profits would rise from three to four shillings, and the rate of profit from 100 to 200
per cent. Although the labourer's absolute standard of life would have remained the
same, his relative  wages, and therewith his relative social position, as compared with
that of the capitalist, would have been  lowered. If the working man should resist that
reduction of relative wages, he would only try to get some share in the increased
productive powers of his own labour , and to maintain his former relative position in
the social scale. Thus, after the abolition of the Corn Laws, and in flagrant violation of
the most solemn pledges given during the anti-corn law agitation, the Engl ish factory
lords generally reduced wages ten per cent. The resistance of the workmen was at first
150baffled, but, consequent upon circums tances I cannot now enter upon, the ten per cent
lost were afterwards regained.
2. The values  of necess aries, and consequently the value of labour , might remain the
same, but a change might occur in their money prices , consequent upon a previous
change in the value of money . By the discovery of more fertile mines and so forth, two
ounces of gold might, for example, cost no more labour to produce than one ounce did
before. The value  of gold would then be depreciated by one half, or fifty per cent. As
the values  of all other comm odities would then be expressed in twice their former
money prices, so also the same  with the value of labour . Twelve hours of labour ,
formerly expressed  in six shillings, would now be expressed in twelve shillings. If the
working man's wages should remain three shillings, instead of rising to six shillings,
the money price of his labour  would only be equal to half the value of his labour , and
his standa rd of life would fearfully deteriorate. This would also happen in a greater or
lesser degree if his wages should rise, but not proportionately to the fall in the value
of gold. In such a case nothing would have been changed, either in the productive
powers of labour , or in supply and demand, or in values.
Nothing could have changed except the money names  of those values. To say that in
such a case the workman ought not to insist upon a proportionate rise of wages, is to
say that he much be content to be paid with names, instead of with things. All past
history proves that whenever such a depreciation of money occurs, the capitalists are
on the alert to seize  this opportunity for defrauding the workman. A very large school
of political economists assert that, consequent upon the new discoveries of gold lands,
the better working of silver mines, and the cheaper supply of quicksilver , the value of
precious metals has again deprec iated. This would explain the general and
simultaneous attempts on the Continent at a rise of wages.
3. We have till now supposed that the working day has given  limits. The working day,
however , has, by itself, no constant limits. It is the constant tendency of capital to
stretch it to its utmost physically possible length, because in the same degree surplus
labour , and consequently the profit resulting therefrom, will be increased. The more
capital succeeds in prolonging the working day, the greater the amount of other
peoples' labour it will appropriate.
During the seventeenth and even the first two thirds of the eighteenth century a ten
hours working day was the normal working day all over England. During the anti-
Jacobin war, which was in fact a war waged by the British barons against the British
working masses, capital celebrated its bacchanalia, and prolonged the working day
from ten to twelve,  fourteen, eighteen hours. Malthus, by no means a man whom you
would suspect of a maudlin sentimentalism declared in a pamphlet, publi shed about
1815, that if this sort of thing was to go on the life of the nation would be attacked at
its very source. A few years before the general introduction of newly-invented
machinery , about 1765, a pamphlet appeared in England under the title, An Essay On
Trade. The anonymous author , an avowed enemy of the working classes, declaims on
the necessity of expanding the limits of the working day. Amongst other means to this
end, he proposes working houses , which, he says, ought to be "Houses of Terror ." And
what is the length of the working he prescribes for these "Houses of Terror"? twelve
151hours , the very same time which in 1832 was declared by capitalists, political
economists, and ministers to be not only the existing but the necessary time of labour
for a child under twelve years.
By selling his labouring power , and he must do so under the present system, the
working man makes over to the capitalist the consumption of that power , but within
certain rational limits. He sells his labouring power in order to maintain it, apart from
its natural wear and tear, but not to destroy it. In selling his labouring power at its
daily or weekly value, it is understood that in one day or one week that labouring
power shall not be submitted to two days' or two weeks' waste or wear and tear. Take
a machine worth 1000 Pounds. If it is used up in ten years it will add to the value of
the commodities in whose production  it assists 100 Pounds yearly . If it is used up in
five years it will add 200 Pounds yearly , or the value of its annual wear and tear is in
inverse ratio to the quickness with which it is consumed. But this distinguishes the
working man from the machine. Machinery does not wear out exactly in the same
ratio in which it is used. Man, on the contrary , decays in a greater ratio than would be
visible from the mere numerical addition of work.
In their attempts at reducing the working day to its former rational dimensions, or,
where they cannot enforce a legal fixation of a normal working day, at checking
overwork by a rise of wages, a rise not only in proportion to the surplus time exacted,
but in a greater proportion, working men fulfill only a duty to themselve s and their
race. They only set limits to the tyran nical usurpations of capital. Time is the room of