Exchange value, at first sight, presents itself as a quantitative relation, as the
proportion in which values in use of one sort are exchanged for those of another sort,
a relation constantly changing with time and place. Hence exchange value appears to
be someth ing accidental and purely relative, and consequently an intrinsic  value, i.e.,
an exchange value that is inseparably connected with, inherent in commodities, seems
a contradiction in terms.   Let us consider the matter a little more closely .
A given commodity , e.g., a quarter of wheat is exchanged for x blacking, y silk, or z
gold, &c. – in short, for other commo dities in the most different proportio ns. Instead
of one exchange value, the wheat has, therefore, a great many . But since x blacking, y
silk, or z gold &c., each represents the exchange value of one quarter of wheat, x
blacking, y silk, z gold, &c., must, as exchange values, be replaceable by each other ,
or equal to each other . Therefore, first: the valid exchange values of a given
commodity express something equal; secondly , exchange value, generally , is only the
mode of expression, the phenomenal form, of something contained in it, yet
distinguishable from it.
Let us take two commodities, e.g., corn and iron. The proportions in which they are
exchangeable, whatever those proportions may be, can always be represe nted by an
equation in which a given quantity of corn is equated to some quantity of iron: e.g., 1
quarter corn = x cwt. iron. What does this equation tell us? It tells us that in two
different things – in 1 quarter of corn and x cwt. of iron, there exists in equal
quantities something common to both. The two things must therefore be equal to a
third, which in itself is neither the one nor the other . Each of them, so far as it is
exchange value, must therefore be reducible to this third.
A simple geometrical illustration will make this clear . In order to calculate and
compare the areas of rectilinear figures, we decompose them into triangles. But the
area of the triangle itself is expressed by something totally different from  its visible
figure, namely , by half the product of the base multiplied by the altitude. In the same
way the exchange values of commodities must be capable of being express ed in terms
of something common to them all, of which thing they represent a greater or less
quantity .
This common “som ething” cannot be either a geometrical, a chemical, or any other
natural property of commodities. Such properties claim our attention only in so far as
they affect the utility of those commo dities, make them use values. But the exchange
of commodities is evidently an act characterised by a total abstraction from  use value.
Then one use value is just as good as another , provided only it be present in sufficient
quantity . Or, as old Barbon says, “one sort of wares are as good as another , if the
values be equal. There is no difference or distinction in things of equal value ... An
162hundred pounds’  worth of lead or iron, is of as great value as one hundred pounds’
worth of silver or gold.”
As use values, commodities are, above all, of different qualities, but as exchange
values they are merely different quantities, and consequently do not contain an atom
of use value.
If then we leave out of consideration the use value of commodities, they have only
one comm on prope rty left, that of being products of labour . But even the product of
labour itself has undergone a change in our hands. If we make abstraction from its use
value, we make abstraction at the same time from the material elements and shapes
that make the product a use value; we see in it no longer a table, a house, yarn, or any
other useful thing. Its existence as a material thing is put out of sight. Neither can it
any longer be regarded as the product of the labour of the joiner , the mason, the
spinner , or of any other definite kind of productive labour . Along with the useful
qualities of the products themselves, we put out of sight both the useful character of
the various kinds of labour embodied in them, and the concrete forms of that labour;
there is nothing left but what is common to them all; all are reduced to one and the
same sort of labour , human labour in the abstract.
Let us now consid er the residue of each of these products; it consists of the same
unsubstantial reality in each, a mere congelation of homogeneous human  labour , of
labour power expe nded without regard to the mode of its expenditure. All that these
things now tell us is, that human labour power has been expended in their production,
that human labour is embodied in them. When looked at as crystals of this social
substance, common to them all, they are – Values.
We have seen that when commodities  are exchanged, their exchange value  manifests
itself as something totally independen t of their use value. But if we abstract from their
use value , there remains their Value as defined above. Therefore, the common
substance that manifests itself in the exchange value of commodities, whenever they
are exchanged, is their value. The progress of our investigation will show that
exchange value is the only form in which the value of commodities can manifest itself
or be expressed. For the present, however, we have to consider the nature of value
independently of this, its form.
A use value, or useful article, therefore, has value only because human labour in the
abstract has been embodied or materi alised in it. How , then, is the magnit ude of this
value to be measured? Plainly , by the quantity of the value-creating substance, the
labour , contained in the article. The quantity of labour , however , is measured by its
duration, and labour time in its turn finds its standard in weeks, days, and hours.
Some people might think that if the value of a commodity is determined by the
quantity of labour spent on it, the more idle and unskilful the labourer , the more
valuable would his commodity be, because more time would be required in its
production. The labour , however , that forms the substance of value, is homogeneous
human labour, expenditure of one uniform labour power . The total labou r power of
society , which is embodied in the sum total of the values of all commodities produced
by that society , counts here as one homogeneous mass of human labour power ,
composed though it be of innumerab le individual units. Each of these units is the
163same as any other , so far as it has the character of the average labour power of society ,
and takes effect as such; that is, so far as it requires for producing a commodity , no
more time than is needed on an average, no more than is socially necessary . The
labour time sociall y necessary is that required to produce an article under the normal
conditions of production, and with the average degree of skill and intensity  prevalent
at the time. The introduction of power -looms into England probably reduced by one-
half the labour required to weave a given quantity of yarn into cloth. The hand-loom
weavers, as a matter of fact, continued to require the same time as before; but for all
that, the product of one hour of their labour represented after the change only half an
hour’s social labour , and consequently fell to one-half its former value.
We see then that that which determines the magnitude of the value of any article is the
amount of labour socially necessary , or the labour time socially necessary for its
production. Each individual commodity , in this connexion, is to be considered as an
average sample of its class. Commo dities, therefore, in which equal quantities of
labour are embodi ed, or which can be produced in the same time, have the same
value. The value of one commodity is to the value of any other , as the labour time
necessary for the production of the one is to that necessary for the production of the
other . “As values, all commodities are only definite masses of congealed labour time.”
The value of a commodity would therefore remain constant, if the labour time
required for its production also remained constant. But the latter changes with every
variation in the productiveness of labour . This productiveness is determined by
various circumstan ces, amongst others, by the average amount of skill of the
workmen, the state of science, and the degree of its practical application, the social
organisation of production, the extent and capabilities of the means of production, and
by physical conditions. For example, the same amount of labour in favourab le seasons
is embodied in 8 bushels of corn, and in unfavourable, only in four. The same labour
extracts from rich mines more metal than from poor mines. Diamonds are of very rare
occurrence on the earth’ s surface, and hence their discovery costs, on an average, a
great deal of labour time. Consequently much labour is represented in a small
compass. Jacob doubts whether gold has ever been paid for at its full value. This
applies still more to diamonds. According to Eschwege, the total produce of the
Brazilian diamond mines for the eighty years, ending in 1823, had not realised the
price of one-and-a- half years’  average produce of the sugar and coffee plantations of
the same country , although the diamonds cost much more labour , and therefore
represented more value. With richer mines, the same quantity of labour would
embody itself in more diamonds, and their value would fall. If we could succeed at a
small expenditure of labour , in conver ting carbon into diamonds, their value  might fall
below that of bricks. In general, the greater the productiveness of labour , the less is
the labou r time required for the production of an article, the less is the amount of
labour crystallised in that article, and the less is its value; and vice versâ , the less the
productiveness of labour , the greater is the labour time required for the production of