history is the last consequence, reduc ed to its ‘finest expression,’  of all this German
historiography , for which it is not a question of real, nor even of political, interests,
but of pure though ts, which consequently must appear to Saint Bruno as a series of
‘thoughts’  that devour one another and are finally swallowed up in ‘self-
consciousness.’  -
[Mar ginal note by Marx : So-calle d objective historiography consisted precisely , in
treating the historical relations separately from activity . Reactionary character .]
 - and even more consistently the course of history must appear to Saint Max Stirner ,
who know s not a thing about real history , as a mere ‘tale of knights, robbers and
ghosts,’  from whose visions he can, of course, only save himself by ‘unholiness’. This
conception is truly religious: it postulates religious man as the primitive man, the
starting-point of history , and in its imagination puts the religious production of fancies
in the place of the real production of the means of subsistence and of life itself.
This whole concep tion of history , together with its dissolution and the scruples and
qualms resulting from it, is a purely national affair of the Germans and has merely
local interest for Germany , as for instance the important question which has been
under discussion in recent times: how exactly one ‘passes from the realm of God to
the realm of Man’  [Ludwig Feuerbach , Ueber das Wesen des Christenthums ] - as if
this ‘realm of God’  had ever existe d anywhere save in the imagination, and the
learned gentlemen, without being aware of it, were not constantly living in the ‘realm
of Man’  to which they are now seeking the way; and as if the learned pastim e (for it is
nothing more) of explaining the mystery of this theoretical bubble-blowing  did not on
the contrary lie in demonstrating its origin in actual earthly relations. For these
Germans, it is altogether simply a matter of resolving the ready-made nonsense they
find into some other freak, i.e., of presupposing that all this nonsense has a special
sense which can be discovered; while really  it is only a question of explaining these
theoretical phrases from the actual existing relations. The real, practical dissolution of
these phrases, the removal of these notions from the consciousness of men, will, as we
have already said, be effected by altered circumstances, not by theoretical deductions.
For the mass of men, i.e., the prolet ariat, these theoretical notions do not exist and
hence do not require to be dissolved, and if this mass ever had any theoretical notions,
e.g., religion, these have now long been dissolved by circumstances.
The purely national character of these questions and solutions is moreover shown by
the fact that these theorists believe in all seriousness that chimeras like ‘the God-
Man,’  ‘Man,’ etc., have presided over individual epochs of history (Saint Bruno even
goes so far as to assert that only ‘criticism and critics have made history ,’ [Bruno
Bauer , Charakteristik Ludwig Feuerbachs ] and when they themselves construct
historical systems,  they skip over all earlier periods in the greatest haste and pass
immediately from ‘Mongolism’  [Max Stirner , Der Einzige und sein Eigenthum ] to
34history ‘with meaningful content,’  that is to say, to the history , of the Hallische and
Deutsche Jahrbücher and the dissolution of the Hegelian school into a general
squabble. They forget all other nations, all real events, and the theatrum mundi  is
confined to the Leipzig book fair and the mutual quarrels of ‘criticism,’  [Bruno Bauer]
‘man,’  [Ludwig Feuerbach]  and ‘the unique’. [Max Stirner] If for once these theorists
treat really historical subjects, as for instance the eighteenth century , they merely give
a history of ideas, separated from the facts and the practical development underlying
them; and even that merely in order to represent that period as an imperfect
preliminary stage, the as yet limited predecessor of the truly historical age, i.e., the
period of the German philosophic struggle from 1840 to 1844. As might be expected
when the history of an earlier period is written with the aim of accentuating the
brilliance of an unhistoric person and his fantasies, all the really historic events, even
the really historic interventions of politics in history , receive no mention. Instead we
get a narrative based not on research but on arbitrary constructions and literary gossip,
such as Saint Brun o provided in his now forgotten history of the eighteenth century .
[Bruno Bauer , Geschichte der Politik, Cultur und Aufklärung des achtzehnten
Jahrhunderts ] These pompous and arrogant hucksters of ideas, who imagine
themselves infinitely exalted above all national prejudices, are thus in practice far
more national than the beer-swilling philistines who dream of a united Germany . They
do not recognise the deeds of other nations as historical; they live in Germany , within
Germany 1281 and for Germany; they turn the Rhine-song into a religious hymn and
conquer Alsace and Lorraine by robbing French philosophy instead of the French
state, by Germanis ing French ideas instead of French provinces. Herr Venedey is a
cosmopolitan compared with the Saints Bruno and Max, who, in the universal
dominance of theory , proclaim the universal dominance of Germany .
Feuerbach: Philosophic, and Real, Liberation
[...] It is also clear from these arguments how grossly Feuerbach is deceivi ng himself
when (Wigand’ s Vierteljahrsschrift , 1845, Band 2) by virtue of the qualification
‘common man’  he declares himself a communist,  - 26 transforms the latter into a
predicate of ‘man,’  and thereby thinks it possible to change the word ‘communist,’
which in the real world means the follower of a definite revolutionary party, into a
mere category . Feuerbach’ s whole deduction with regard to the relation of men to one
another goes only so far as to prove that men need and always have needed each other .
He wants to establi sh consciousness of this fact, that is to say, like the other theorists,
merely to produce a correct consciousness about an existing fact; whereas for the real
communist it is a question of overthrowing the existing state of things. We thoroughly
appreciate, moreover , that Feuerbach, in endeavouring to produce consciousness of
just this fact, is going as far as a theor ist possibly can, without ceasing to be a theorist
and philosopher ...
As an example of Feuerbach’ s accept ance and at the same time misunderstanding of
existing reality , which he still shares with our opponents, we recall the passage in the
Philosophie der Zukunft  where he develops  the view that the existence of a thing or a
man is at the same time its or his essence, that the conditions of existence, the mode
of life and activity of an animal or human individual are those in which its ‘essence’
35feels itself satisfied. Here every exception is expressly conceived as an unhappy
chance, as an abnormality which cannot be altered. Thus if millions of proletarians
feel by no means contented with their living conditions, if their ‘existence’  does not in
the least correspond to their ‘essence,’  then, according to the passage quoted, this is an
unavoidable misfor tune, which must be borne quietly . The millions of proletarians and
communists, howe ver, think differently and will prove this in time, when they bring
their ‘existence’  into harmony with their ‘essence’  in a practical way, by means of a
revolution. Feuerba ch, therefore, never speaks of the world of man in such cases, but
always takes refuge in external nature, and moreover in nature which has not yet been
subdued by men. But every new inven tion, every advance made by industr y, detaches
another piece from this domain, so that the ground which produces examples
illustrating such Feuerbachian propositions is steadily shrinking.
The ‘essence’  of the fish is its ‘being,’  water - to go no further than this one
proposition. The ‘essence’  of the freshwater fish is the water of a river. But the latter
ceases to be the ‘essence’  of the fish and is no longer a suitable medium of existence
as soon as the river is made to serve industry , as soon as it is polluted by dyes and
other waste produc ts and navigated by steamboats, or as soon as its water is diverted
into canals where simple drainage can deprive the fish of its medium of existence. The
explanation that all such contradictions are inevitable abnormalities does not
essentially differ from the consola tion which Saint Max Stirner offers to the
discontented, savin g that this contradiction is their own contradiction and this
predicament their own predicament, whereupon then, should either set their minds at
ease, keep their disgust to themselve s, or revolt against it in some fantas tic way. It
differs just as little from Saint Bruno’ s allegation that these unfortunate circumstances
are due to the fact that those concerned are stuck in the muck of ‘substance,’  have not
advanced to ‘absolute self-consciou sness and do not realise that these adverse
conditions are spirit of their spirit.
[II.]
[1. Preconditions of the Real Liberation of Man]
[...] We shall, of course, not take the trouble to enlighten our wise philosophers by
explaining to them that the ‘liberation’  of man is not advanced a single step by
reducing philosophy , theology , substa nce and all the trash to ‘self-consciousness’  and
by liberating man from the domination of these phrases, which have never held him in
thrall. Nor will we explain to them that it is only possible to achieve real liberation in
the real world and by employing real means, that slavery cannot be abolish ed without
the steam-engine and the mule and spinning-jenny , serfdom cannot be abolished
without improved agriculture, and that, in general, people cannot be liberated as long
as they are unable to obtain food and drink, housing and clothing in adequate quality