expenditure, takes the form of the quantity of value of the products of labour; and
finally the mutual relations of the producers, within which the social charac ter of their
labour af firms itself, take the form of a social relation between the products.
A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the social character
of men’s labour appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product
of that labour; because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their own
labour is presented  to them as a social relation, existing not between themselves, but
between the products of their labour . This is the reason why the products of labour
become commodities, social things whose qualities are at the same time perceptible
and imperceptible by the senses. In the same way the light from an object is perceived
by us not as the subjective excitation of our optic nerve, but as the objective form of
something outside the eye itself. But, in the act of seeing, there is at all events, an
170actual passage of light from one thing to another , from the external object to the eye.
There is a physic al relation between physical things. But it is different with
commodities. There, the existence of the things quâ commodities, and the value
relation between the products of labour which stamps them as commod ities, have
absolutely no connection with their physical properties and with the material relations
arising therefrom. There it is a definite social relation between men, that assumes, in
their eyes, the fantastic form of a relation between things. In order , therefore, to find
an analogy , we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped regions of the religious
world. In that world the productions of the human brain appear as independent beings
endowed with life, and entering into relation both with one another and the human
race. So it is in the world of commodities with the products of men’ s hands.  This I call
the Fetish ism whic h attaches itself to the products of labour , so soon as they are
produced as commodities, and which is therefore inseparable from the production of
commodities.
This Fetis hism of commodities has its origin, as the foregoing analysis has already
shown, in the peculiar social character of the labour that produces them.
As a general rule, articles of utility  become commodities, only because they are
products of the labour of private individuals or groups of individuals who carry on
their work independently of each other. The sum total of the labour of all these private
individuals forms the aggregate labour of society . Since the producers do not come
into socia l contact  with each other until they exchange their products, the specific
social character of each producer ’s labour does not show itself except in the act of
exchange. In other words, the labour of the individual asserts itself as a part of the
labour of society , only by means of the relations which the act of exchange establishes
directly between the products, and indirectly , through them, between the producers.
To the latter , theref ore, the relations connecting the labour of one individual with that
of the rest appear , not as direct socia l relations between individuals at work, but as
what they really are, material relations between persons and social relations between
things. It is only by being exchanged that the products of labour acquire,  as values,
one uniform social status, distinct from their varied forms of existence as objects of
utility . This divisio n of a product into a useful thing and a value becomes practically
important, only when exchange has acquired such an extension that useful articles are
produced for the purpose of being exchanged, and their character as values has
therefore to be taken into account, beforehand, during production. From this moment
the labour of the individual producer acquires socially a twofold character . On the one
hand, it must, as a definite useful kind of labour , satisfy a definite social want, and
thus hold its place as part and parcel of the collective labour of all, as a branch of a
social division of labour that has sprung up spontaneously . On the other hand, it can
satisfy the manifold wants of the individual producer himself, only in so far as the
mutual exchangeability of all kinds of useful private labour is an established social
fact, and therefore the private useful labour of each producer ranks on an equality with
that of all others. The equalisation of the most different kinds of labour can be the
result only of an abstraction from their inequalities, or of reducing them to their
common denominator , viz. expenditure of human labour power or human  labour in
the abstract. The twofold social character of the labour of the individual appears to
171him, when reflected in his brain, only under those forms which are impre ssed upon
that labou r in every-day practice by the exchange of products. In this way, the
character that his own labour possesses of being socially useful takes the form of the
condition, that the product must be not only useful, but useful for others, and the
social character that his particular labour has of being the equal of all other particular
kinds of labour , takes the form that all the physically different articles that are the
products of labour . have one common quality , viz., that of having value.
Hence, when we bring the products of our labour into relation with each other as
values, it is not because we see in these articles the material receptacles of
homogeneous human labour . Quite the contrary: whenever , by an exchange, we
equate as values our different produc ts, by that very act, we also equate,  as human
labour , the different kinds of labour expended upon them. We are not aware of this,
nevertheless we do it. Value, therefo re, does not stalk about with a label describing
what it is. It is value, rather , that converts every product into a social hieroglyphic.
Later on, we try to decipher the hieroglyphic, to get behind the secret of our own
social products; for to stamp an object of utility as a value, is just as much a social
product as languag e. The recent scientific discovery , that the products of labour , so far
as they are values,  are but material expressions of the human labour spent in their
production, marks,  indeed, an epoch in the history of the development of the human
race, but, by no means, dissipates the mist through which the social character of
labour appears to us to be an objective character of the products themselve s. The fact,
that in the particular form of production with which we are dealing, viz., the
production of commodities, the specific social character of private labour  carried on
independently , consists in the equality of every kind of that labour , by virtue of its
being human labour , which character , therefore, assumes in the product the form of
value – this fact appears to the producers, notwithstanding the discov ery above
referred to, to be just as real and final, as the fact, that, after the discovery by science
of the component gases of air , the atmosphere itself remained unaltered.
What, first of all, practically concerns  producers when they make an exchange, is the
question, how much of some other product they get for their own? in what proportions
the products are exchangeable? When these proportions have, by custom,  attained a
certain stability , they appear to result from the nature of the products, so that, for
instance, one ton of iron and two ounces of gold appear as naturally to be of equal
value as a pound of gold and a pound of iron in spite of their different physical and
chemical qualities appear to be of equal weight. The character of having value, when
once impressed upon products, obtains fixity only by reason of their acting and re-
acting upon each other as quantitie s of value. These quantities vary continually ,
independently of the will, foresight and action of the producers. To them, their own
social action takes the form of the action of objects, which rule the produc ers instead
of being ruled by them. It requires a fully developed production of commodities
before, from accumulated experience  alone, the scientific conviction sprin gs up, that
all the different kinds of private labour , which are carried on independently of each
other , and yet as spontaneously deve loped branches of the social division  of labour ,
are continually being reduced to the quantitative proportions in which society requires
them. And why? Because, in the midst of all the accidental and ever fluctuating
172exchange relations  between the products, the labour time socially necessary for their
production forcibly asserts itself like an over-riding law of Nature. The law of gravity
thus asserts itself when a house falls about our ears.  The determination of the
magnitude of value by labour time is therefore a secret, hidden under the apparent
fluctuations in the relative values of commodities. Its discovery , while removing all
appearance of mere accidentality from the determination of the magnitude of the
values of products , yet in no way alters the mode in which that determin ation takes
place.
Man’ s reflections on the forms of social life, and consequently , also, his scientific
analysis of those forms, take a course directly opposite to that of their actual historical
development. He begins, post festum , with the results of the process of development
ready to hand before him. The characters that stamp products as commodities, and
whose establishment is a necessary preliminary to the circulation of commodities,
have already acquired the stability of natural, self-understood forms of social life,
before man seeks to decipher , not their historical character , for in his eyes they are
immutable, but their meaning. Cons equently it was the analysis of the prices of