instruments of labour  enables the emplo ying capitalist to produce a surplus value, or,
what comes to the same, to appropriate to himself a certain amount of unpaid labour ,
enables the owner of the means of labour , which he lends wholly or partly to the
employing capitalist - enables, in one word, the money-lending capitalist to claim for
146himself under the name of interest another part of that surplus value, so that there
remains to the employing capitalist as such only what is called industrial  or
commer cial pr ofit.
By what laws this division of the total amount of surplus value amongs t the three
categories of people is regulated is a question quite foreign to our subject. This much,
however , results from what has been stated.
Rent, interest, and industrial profit are only different names for differen t parts of the
surplus value  of the commodity , or the unpaid labour enclosed in it, and they are
equally derived from this source and from this source alone . They are not derived
from land as such or from capital  as such, but land and capital enable their owners to
get their respective shares out of the surplus value extracted by the employing
capitalist from the labourer . For the labourer himself it is a matter of subordinate
importance whethe r that surplus value, the result of his surplus labour , or unpaid
labour , is altogether pocketed by the employing capitalist, or whether the latter is
obliged to pay portions of it, under the name of rent and interest, away to third parties.
Suppose the employing capitalist to use only is own capital and to be his own
landlord, then the whole surplus value would go into his pocket.
It is the employing capitalist who immediately extracts from the labourer this surplus
value, whatever part of it he may ultimately be able to keep for himself. Upon this
relation, therefore between the employing capitalist and the wages labourer the whole
wages system and the whole present system of production hinge. Some of the citizens
who took part in our debate were, there, wrong in trying to mince matters, and to treat
this fundamental relation between the employing capitalist and the workin g man as a
secondary question, although they were right in stating that, under given
circumstances, a rise of prices might affect in very unequal degrees the employing
capitalist, the landlord, the moneyed capitalist, and, if you please, the tax-gatherer .
Another consequence follows from what has been stated.
That part of the value of the commo dity which represents only the value of the raw
materials, the machinery , in one word, the value of the means of production used up,
forms no revenue  at all, but replaces only capital . But, apart from this, it is false that
the other part of the value of the commodity which forms revenue , or may be spent in
the form of wages , profits, rent, interest, is constituted  by the value of wages, the
value of rent, the value of profits, and so forth. We shall, in the first instance, discard
wages, and only treat industrial profits, interest, and rent. We have just seen that the
surplus value contained  in the commodity , or that part of its value in which unpaid
labour  is realiz ed, resol ves itself into different fractions, bearing three different
names.
But it would be quite the reverse of the truth to say that its value is composed of, or
formed  by, the addition  of the  independent values of these thr ee constituents .
If one hour of labour realizes itself in a value of sixpence, if the working day of the
labourer comprises twelve hours, if half of this time is unpaid labour , that surplus
labour will add to the commodity a surplus value  of three shillings, that is of value for
which no equivalent has been paid. This surplus value of three shillings constitutes the
whole fund which the employing capitalist may divide, in whatever proportions, with
147the landlord and the money-lender . The value of these three shillings constitutes the
limit of the value they have to divide amongst them. But it is not the employing
capitalist who adds to the value of the commodity an arbitrary value for his profit, to
which another value is added for the landlord, and so forth, so that the addition of
these arbitrarily fixed values would constitute the total value. You see, therefore, the
fallacy of the popular notion, which confounds the decomposition of a given value
into three  parts, with the formation  of that value by the addition of three independent
values, thus conve rting the aggregate value, from which rent, profit, and interest are
derived, into an arbitrary magnitude.
If the total profit realized by a capitalist is equal to 100 Pounds, we call this sum,
considered as absolute  magnitude, the amount of profit. But if we calculate the ratio
which those 100 Pounds bear to the capital advanced, we call this relative  magnitude,
the rate of profit. It is evident that this rate of profit may be expressed in a double
way.
Suppose 100 Pound s to be the capital advanced in wages . If the surplus value created
is also 100 Pounds  - and this would show us that half the working day of the labourer
consists of unpaid  labour - and if we measured this profit by the value of the capital
advanced in wages, we should say that the rate of profit amounted to one hundred per
cent, because the value advanced would be one hundred and the value realized would
be two hundred.
If, on the other hand, we should not only consider the capital advanced in wages , but
the total capital  advanced, say, for example, 500 Pounds, of which 400 Pounds
represented the value of raw materials , machinery , and so forth, we should say that the
rate of profit amounted only to twenty per cent, because the profit of one hundred
would be but the fifth part of the total capital advanced.
The first mode of expressing the rate of profit is the only one which shows you the
real ratio between paid and unpaid labour , the real degree of the exploitation  (you
must allow me this French word) of labour . The other mode of expression is that in
common use, and is, indeed, appropriate for certain purposes. At all events, it is very
useful for concealing the degree in which the capitalist extracts gratuitous labour from
the workman.
In the remarks I have still to make I shall use the word profit for the whole amount of
the surplu s value extracted by the capitalist without any regard to the division of that
surplus value between different parties, and in using the words rate of profit, I shall
always measure profits by the value of the capital advanced in wages.
XII. Gen eral Relation of Profits, Wages, and Prices
Deduct from the value of a commodity the value replacing the value of the raw
materials and other means of production used upon it, that is to say, deduct the value
representing the past labour contained in it, and the remain der of its value will resolve
into the quantity of labour added by the working man last employed. If that working
man works twelve hours daily , if twelves hours of average labour crystallize
themselves in an amount of gold equal to six shillings, this additional value of six
shillings is the only value his labour will have created. This given value, determined
by the time of his labour , is the only fund from which both he and the capitalist have
148to draw their respective shares or dividends, the only value to be divided into wages
and profits. It is evident that this value itself will not be altered by the variable
proportions in which it may be divid ed amongst the two parties. There will also be
nothing changed if in the place of one working man you put the whole working
population, twelve million working days, for example, instead of one.
Since the capitalist and workman have only to divide this limited value, that is, the
value measured by the total labour of the working man, the more the one gets the less
will the other get, and vice versa . Whenever a quantity is given, one part of it will
increase inversely as the other decreases. If the wages change, profits will change in
an opposi te directio n. If wages fall, profits will rise; and if wages rise, profits will fall.
If the working man, on our former supposition, gets three shillings, equal to one half
of the value he has created, or if his whole working day consists half of paid, half of
unpaid labour, the rate of profit will be 100 percen t, because the capitalist would also
get three shillings. If the working man receives only two shillings, or works only one
third of the whole day for himself, the capitalist will get four shillings, and the rate of
profit will be 200 per cent. If the working man receives four shillings, the capitalist
will only receive two, and the rate of profit would sink to 50 percent, but all these
variations will not affect the value of the commodity . A general rise of wages would,
therefore, result in a fall of the general rate of profit, but not af fect values.
But although the values of commodit ies, which must ultimately regulate their market
prices, are exclusiv ely determined by the total quantities of labour fixed in them, and
not by the divisio n of that quantity  into paid and unpaid labour , it by no means
follows that the values of the single commodities, or lots of commodities, produced
during twelve hours, for example, will remain constant. The number  or mass  of
commodities produ ced in a given time of labour , or by a given quantity of labour ,
depends upon the productive power  of the labour empl oyed, and not upon  its extent  or
length. With one degree of the productive power of spinning labour , for example, a
working day of twelve hours may produce twelve pounds of yarn, with a lesser degree
of produc tive power only two poun ds. If then twelve hours' average labour were
realized in the value of six shillings in the one case, the twelve pounds of yarn would
cost six shillings, in the other case the two pounds of yarn would also cost six