rendered difficult by the strip-system, beside which the cottage industry of the
peasants themselve s emer ged. In industry there was no division of labour at all in the
individual trades themselves, and very little between them. The separation of industry
and commerce was found already in existence in older towns; in the newer it only
developed later , when the towns entered into mutual relations.
The grouping of larger territories into feudal kingdoms was a necessity for the landed
nobility as for the towns. The organisation of the ruling class, the nobility , had,
therefore, everywhere a monarch at its head.
22[4. The Essence of the Materialist Conception of History.
Social Being and Social Consciousness]
The fact is, therefore, that definite individuals who are productively active in a
definite way enter into these definite social and political relations. Empirical
observation must in each separate instance bring out empirically , and without any
mystification and speculation, the connection of the social and political structure with
production. The social structure and the State are continually evolving out of the life-
process of definite individuals, but of individuals, not as they may appear in their own
or other people’ s imagination, but as they really are; i.e. as they operate, produce
materially , and hence as they work under definite material limits, presuppositions and
conditions independent of their will.
[The follo wing passage is crossed out in the manuscript:] The ideas  which these
individuals form are ideas either about their relation to nature or about their mutual
relations or about their own nature. It is evident that in all these cases their ideas are
the conscious expression - real or illusory - of their real relations and activities, of
their production, of their intercourse, of their social and political conduct. The
opposite assumption is only possible if in addition to the spirit of the real, materially
evolved individuals a separate spirit is presupposed. If the conscious expres sion of the
real relati ons of these individuals is illusory , if in their imagination they turn reality
upside-down, then this in its turn is the result of their limited material mode of activity
and their limited social relations arising from it.
The production of ideas, of conceptions, of consciousness, is at first directly
interwoven with the material activity and the material intercourse of men, the
language of real life. Conceiving, thinking, the mental intercourse of men, appear at
this stage  as the direct efflux of their material behaviour . The same applies  to mental
production as expressed in the language of politics, laws, morality , religion,
metaphysics, etc., of a people. Men are the producers of their conceptions, ideas, etc. -
real, active men, as they are conditioned by a definite development of their productive
forces and of the intercourse corresponding to these, up to its furthest forms.
Consciousness can never be anything  else than conscious existence, and the existence
of men is their actual life-process. If in all ideology men and their circumstances
appear upside-down as in a camera obscura , this phenomenon  arises just as much
from their historical life-process as the inversion of objects on the retina does from
their physical life-process.
In direct contrast to German philosophy which descends from heaven to earth, here
we ascend from earth to heaven. That is to say, we do not set out from what men say,
imagine, conceive,  nor from men as narrated, thought of, imagined, conceived, in
order to arrive at men in the flesh. We set out from real, active men, and on the basis
of their real life-process we demonstrate the development of the ideological reflexes
and echoe s of this life-process. The phantoms formed in the human brain are also,
necessarily , sublim ates of their mater ial life-process, which is empirically verifiable
and bound to material premises. Morality , religion, metaphysics, all the rest of
ideology and their corresponding forms of consciousness, thus no longer retain the
semblance of independence. They have no history , no development; but men,
23developing their material production and their material intercourse, alter, along with
this their real existence, their thinkin g and the products of their thinking. Life is not
determined by consciousness, but consciousness by life. In the first method of
approach the starting-point is consciousness taken as the living individ ual; in the
second method, which conforms to real life, it is the real living individuals
themselves, and consciousness is considered solely as their consciousness.
This method of approach is not devoid  of premises. It starts out from the real premises
and does not abandon them for a moment. Its premises are men, not in any fantastic
isolation and rigidity , but in their actual, empirically perceptible process of
development under definite conditions. As soon as this active life-process is
described, history ceases to be a collection of dead facts as it is with the empiricists
(themselves still abstract), or an imagined activity of imagined subjects, as with the
idealists.
Where speculation ends - in real life - there real, positive science begins: the
representation of the practical activity , of the practical process of development of
men. Emp ty talk about consciousness ceases, and real knowledge has to take its place.
When reality is depicted, philosophy as an independent branch of knowledge loses its
medium of existence. At the best its place can only be taken by a summing-up of the
most general results, abstractions which arise from the observation of the historical
development of men. Viewed apart  from real history , these abstractions have in
themselves no value whatsoever . They can only serve to facilitate the arrangement of
historical material,  to indicate the sequence of its separate strata. But they by no
means afford a recipe or schema, as does philosophy , for neatly trimming the epochs
of history . On the contrary , our difficulties begin only when we set about the
observation and the arrangement - the real depiction - of our historical material,
whether of a past epoch or of the present. The removal of these difficulties is
governed by premises which it is quite impossible to state here, but whic h only the
study of the actual  life-process and the activity of the individuals of each epoch will
make evident. We shall select here some of these abstractions, which we use in
contradistinction to the ideologists, and shall illustrate them by historical examples.
History: Fundamental Conditions
Since we are dealing with the Germa ns, who are devoid of premises, we must begin
by stating  the first premise of all human existence and, therefore, of all history , the
premise, namely , that men must be in a position to live in order to be able to ‘make
history .’ But life involves before everything else eating and drinking, a habitation,
clothing and many  other things. The first historical act is thus the production of the
means to satisfy these needs, the production of material life itself. And indeed this is
an historical act, a fundamental condition of all history , which today , as thousands of
years ago, must daily and hourly be fulfilled merely in order to sustain human life.
Even when the sensuous world is reduced to a minimum, to a stick as with Saint
Bruno  [Bauer], it presupp oses the action of producing the stick. Therefore in any
interpretation of history one has first of all to observe this fundamental fact in all its
significance and all its implications and to accord it its due importance. It is well
24known that the Germans have never done this, and they have never , therefore, had an
earthly basis for history and consequently never an historian. The French and the
English, even if they have conceived  the relation of this fact with so-called history
only in an extremely one-sided fashi on, particularly as long as they remained in the
toils of political ideology , have nevertheless made the first attempts to give the writing
of history  a materialistic basis by being the first to write histories of civil society , of
commerce and industry .
The secon d point is that the satisfaction of the first need (the action of satisfying, and
the instru ment of satisfaction which has been acquired) leads to new needs; and this
production of new needs is the first historical act. Here we recognise immediately the
spiritual ancestry of the great historical wisdom of the Germans who, when they run
out of positive material and when they can serve up neither theological nor political
nor literar y rubbish, assert that this is not history at all, but the ‘prehistoric  era.’ They
do not, however , enlighten us as to how we proceed from this nonsensical ‘prehistory’
to history proper; although, on the other hand, in their historical speculation they seize
upon this ‘prehistory’  with especial eagerness because they imagine themselves safe
there from interference on the part of ‘crude facts,’  and, at the same time, because
there they can give full rein to their speculative impulse and set up and knock down
hypotheses by the thousand.
The third  circumstance which, from the very outset, enters into historical
development, is that men, who daily remake their own life, begin to make other men,
to propagate their kind: the relation between man and woman, parents and children,
the family . The family , which to begin with is the only social relationship , becomes
later, when increased needs create new social relations and the increased population
new needs, a subordinate one (except in Germany), and must then be treated and
analysed according to the existing empirical data, not according to ‘the concept of the
family ,’ as is the custom in Germany .
[Note by Marx:  1. The building of houses. With savages each family has as a