forced upon him - a subjection which makes one man into a restricted town-animal,
the other into a restricted country-anim al, and daily creates anew the conflict between
their interests. Labour is here again the chief thing, power over individu als, and as
long as the latter exists, private property must exist. The abolition of the antagonism
between town and country is one of the first conditions of communal life, a condition
which again depen ds on a mass of material premises and which cannot be fulfilled by
the mere will, as anyone can see at the first glance. (These conditions have still to be
enumerated.) The separation of town and country can also be understood as the
separation of capital and landed property , as the beginning of the existence and
development of capital independent of landed property - the beginning of property
having its basis only in labour and exchange.
In the towns which , in the Middle Ages, did not derive ready-made from  an earlier
period but were formed anew by the serfs who had become free, each man's own
particular labour was his only proper ty apart from the small capital he brought with
him, consisting almost solely of the most necessary tools of his craft. The competition
of serfs constantly escaping into the town, the constant war of the country against the
towns and thus the necessity of an organised municipal military force, the bond of
common ownership  in a particular kind of labour , the necessity of common  buildings
for the sale of their wares at a time when craftsmen were also trader s, and the
consequent exclusi on of the unauthori sed from these buildings, the conflict  among the
interests of the various crafts, the necessity of protecting their laboriousl y acquired
skill, and the feudal organisation of the whole of the country: these were the causes of
42the union of the workers of each craft in guilds. We have not at this point to go further
into the manifold modifications of the guild-system, which arise through later
historical developm ents. The flight of the serfs into the towns went on without
interruption right through the Middle  Ages. These serfs, persecuted by their lords in
the coun try, came separately into the towns, where they found an organised
community , against which they were powerless and in which they had to subject
themselves to the station assigned to them by the demand for their labour and the
interest of their organised urban comp etitors. These workers, entering separately , were
never able to attain to any power , since, if their labour was of the guild type which
had to be learned, the guild-masters bent them to their will and organised them
according to their interest; or if their labour was not such as had to be learned, and
therefore not of the guild type, they became day-labourers and never managed to
organise, remainin g an unorganised rabble. The need for day-labourers in the towns
created the rabble.
These towns were true ‘associations’, called forth by the direct need, the care of
providing for the protection of property , and of multiplying the means of production
and defen ce of the separate members . The rabble of these towns was devoid of any
power , composed as it was of individuals strange to one another who had entered
separately , and who stood unorganised over against an organised power , armed for
war, and jealously watching over them. The journeymen and apprentices were
organised in each craft as it best suited the interest of the masters. The patriarchal
relationship existin g between them and their masters gave the latter a doub le power -
on the one hand because of their influence on the whole life of the journe ymen, and
on the other becaus e, for the journeym en who worked with the same master , it was a
real bond  which held them together against the journeymen of other masters and
separated them from these. And finally , the journeymen were bound to the existing
order by their simple interest in becoming masters themselves. While, therefore, the
rabble at least carried out revolts against the whole municipal order , revolts which
remained completely ineffective because of their powerlessness, the journeymen
never got further than small acts of insubordination within separate guild s, such as
belong to the very nature of the guild- system. The great risings of the Middle Ages all
radiated from the country , but equally remained totally ineffective because of the
isolation and consequent crudity of the peasants.
In the towns, the division of labour between the individual guilds was as yet [quite
naturally derived] and, in the guilds themselves, not at all developed between the
individual workers . Every workman had to be versed in a whole round of tasks, had to
be able to make everything that was to be made with his tools. The limited commerce
and the scanty communication between the individual towns, the lack of population
and the narrow needs did not allow of a higher division of labour , and there fore every
man who wished to become a master had to be proficient in the whole of his craft.
Thus there is found  with medieval craftsmen an interest in their special work and in
proficiency in it, which was capable of rising to a narrow artistic sense. For this very
reason, however , every medieval craftsman was completely absorbed in his work, to
which he had a contented, slavish relationship, and to which he was subjec ted to a far
greater extent than the modern worker , whose work is a matter of indif ference to him.
43Capital in these towns was a naturally derived capital, consisting of a house, the tools
of the craft, and the natural, hereditary customers; and not being realisable, on account
of the backwardness of commerce and the lack of circulation, it descended from father
to son. Unlike modern capital, which  can be assessed in money and which may be
indifferently invest ed in this thing or that, this capital was directly connected with the
particular work of the owner , inseparable from it and to this extent estate capital.
Further Division of Labour
The next extension of the division of labour was the separation of production and
commerce, the formation of a specia l class of merchants; a separation which, in the
towns bequeathed by a former period, had been handed down (among other things
with the Jews) and which very soon  appeared in the newly formed ones. With this
there was given the possibility of commercial communications transc ending the
immediate neighbo urhood, a possibility , the realisation of which depended on the
existing means of communication, the state of public safety in the countrys ide, which
was determined by political conditio ns (during the whole of the Middle Ages, as is
well known, the merchants travelled in armed caravans), and on the cruder or more
advanced needs (determined by the stage of culture attained) of the region  accessible
to intercourse.
With commerce the prerogative of a particular class, with the extension of trade
through the merchants beyond the immediate surroundings of the town, there
immediately appears a reciprocal action between production and commerce. The
towns enter into relations with one another , new tools are brought from one town into
the other , and the separation between production and commerce soon calls forth a new
division of production between the individual towns, each of which is soon exploiting
a predominant branch of industry . The local restrictions of earlier times begin
gradually to be broken down.
It depend s purely on the extension of commerce whether the productive forces
achieved in a local ity, especially inventions, are lost for later development  or not. As
long as there exist s no commerce transcending the immediate neighbourhood, every
invention must be made separately  in each locality , and mere chances such as
irruptions of barbaric peoples, even ordinary wars, are sufficient to cause a country
with adva nced productive forces and needs to have to start right over again from the
beginning. In primitive history every invention had to be made daily anew and in each
locality independen tly. How little highly developed productive forces are safe from
complete destruction, given even a relatively very extensive commerce, is proved by
the Phoenicians, whose inventions were for the most part lost for a long time to come
through the ousting of this nation from commerce, its conquest by Alexander and its
consequent decline . Likewise, for instance, glass-painting in the Middle Ages. Only
when commerce has become world commerce and has as its basis large-scale industry ,
when all nations are drawn into the competitive struggle, is the permane nce of the
acquired productive forces assured.
44The Rise of Manufacturing
The immediate consequence of the division of labour between the various towns was
the rise of manuf actures, branches of production which had outgrown the guild-
system. Manufactures first flourishe d, in Italy and later in Flanders, under the
historical premise of commerce with foreign nations. In other countries, England and
France for example , manufactures were at first confined to the home mark et. Besides
the premises already mentioned manufactures depend on an already advanced
concentration of population, particul arly in the countryside, and of capital, which
began to accumulate in the hands of individuals, partly in the guilds in spite of the
guild regulations, partly among the merchants.
That labour which from the first presupposed a machine, even of the crudest sort,
soon show ed itself  the most capable of development. Weaving, earlier carried on in
the count ry by the peasants as a secondary occupation to procure their clothing, was
the first labour to receive an impetus and a further development through the extension
of commerce. Weaving was the first and remained the principal manufacture. The
rising demand for clothing materials, consequent on the growth of population, the