more and more the character of collisions between two classes. Ther eupon, the
workers begin to form combinations (Trades’  Unions) against the bourgeois ; they club
together in order to keep up the rate of wages; they found permanent associations in
order to make provision beforehand for these occasional revolts. Here and there, the
contest breaks out into riots.
Now and then the workers are victorious, but only for a time. The real fruit of their
battles lies, not in the immediate result, but in the ever expanding union of the
workers. This union is helped on by the improved means of communicati on that are
created by modern industry , and that place the workers of different localities in
contact with one another . It was just this contact that was needed to centralise the
numerous local struggles, all of the same character , into one national struggle between
classes. But every class struggle is a political struggle. And that union, to attain which
the burghers of the Middle Ages, with their miserable highways, required centuries,
the modern proletarian, thanks to railways, achieve in a few years.
This organisation of the proletarians into a class, and, consequently into a political
party , is continually being upset again by the competition between the workers
themselves. But it ever rises up again,  stronger , firmer , mightier . It compels  legislative
recognition of particular interests of the workers, by taking advantage of the divisions
among the bour geoisie itself. Thus, the ten-hours’  bill in England was carried.
Altogether collision s between the classes of the old society further , in many ways, the
course of developm ent of the proleta riat. The bourgeoisie finds itself involved in a
constant battle. At first with the aristocracy; later on, with those portions of the
bourgeoisie itself, whose interests have become antagonistic to the progress of
industry; at all time with the bourgeoisie of foreign countries. In all these  battles, it
sees itself compelled to appeal to the proletariat, to ask for help, and thus, to drag it
into the political arena. The bourgeoisie itself, therefore, supplies the prole tariat with
its own elements of political and general education, in other words, it furnishes the
proletariat with weapons for fighting the bour geoisie.
Further , as we have  already seen, entire sections of the ruling class are, by the advance
of industry , precipitated into the proletariat, or are at least threatened in their
conditions of existence. These also supply the proletariat with fresh elements of
enlightenment and progress.
Finally , in times when the class struggle nears the decisive hour, the progress of
dissolution going on within the rulin g class, in fact within the whole range of old
society , assumes such a violent, glaring character , that a small section of the ruling
69class cuts itself adrift, and joins the revolutionary class, the class that holds  the future
in its hands. Just as, therefore, at an earlier period, a section of the nobility went over
to the bourgeoisie,  so now a portion of the bourgeoisie goes over to the proletariat,
and in particular , a portion of the bour geois ideologists, who have raised themselves to
the level of comprehending theoretically the historical movement as a whole.
Of all the classes that stand face to face with the bourgeoisie today , the proletariat
alone is a really revolutionary class. The other classes decay and finally disappear in
the face of Modern Industry; the proletariat is its special and essential product.
The lowe r bourgeoisie, the small manufacturer , the shopkeeper , the artisan, the
peasant, all these fight against the bourgeoisie, to save from extinction their existence
as fractions of the bourgeoisie. They are therefore not revolutionary , but conservative.
Nay more, they are reactionary , for they try to roll back the wheel of history . If by
chance, they are revolutionary , they are only so in view of their impending transfer
into the proletariat ; they thus defend not their present, but their future interests, they
desert their own standpoint to place themselves at that of the proletariat.
The “dangerous class,” [lumpenpr oletariat ] the social scum, that passively rotting
mass thrown off by the lowest layers of the old society , may, here and there, be swept
into the movement by a proletarian revolution; its conditions of life, however , prepare
it far more for the part of a bribed tool of reactionary intrigue.
In the condition of the proletariat, those of old society at large are already virtually
swamped. The proletarian is without property; his relation to his wife and children has
no longer  anything  in common with the bourgeois family relations; mode rn industry
labour , modern subjection to capital, the same in England as in France, in America as
in Germany , has stripped him of every trace of national character . Law, morality ,
religion, are to him so many bourgeois prejudices, behind which lurk in ambush just
as many bour geois interests.
All the preceding classes that got the upper hand sought to fortify their already
acquired status by subjecting society at large to their conditions of appropr iation. The
proletarians cannot become masters of the productive forces of society , except by
abolishing their own previous mode of appropriation, and thereby also every other
previous mode of appropriation. They have nothing of their own to secure and to
fortify; their mission is to destroy all previous securities for, and insurances of,
individual property .
All previous historical movements were movements of minorities, or in the interest of
minorities. The proletarian movement  is the self-conscious, independent movement of
the immense majority , in the interest of the immense majority . The proletariat, the
lowest stratum of our present society , cannot stir, cannot raise itself up, without the
whole superincumbent strata of of ficial society being sprung into the air .
Though not in substance, yet in form, the struggle of the proletaria t with the
bourgeoisie is at first a national struggle. The proletariat of each countr y must, of
course, first of all settle matters with its own bour geoisie.
In depicting the most general phases of the development of the proletariat, we traced
the more or less veiled civil war, raging within existing society , up to the point where
70that war breaks out into open revol ution, and where the violent overth row of the
bourgeoisie lays the foundation for the sway of the proletariat.
Hitherto, every form of society has been based, as we have already seen, on the
antagonism of oppressing and oppre ssed classes. But in order to oppress a class,
certain conditions must be assured to it under which it can, at least, continue its
slavish existence. The serf, in the period of serfdom, raised himself to membership in
the comm une, just as the petty bourgeois, under the yoke of the feudal absolutism,
managed to develop into a bourgeois. The modern labourer , on the contrary , instead of
rising with the process of industry , sinks deeper and deeper below the conditions of
existence of his own class. He beco mes a pauper , and pauperism deve lops more
rapidly than popula tion and wealth. And here it becomes evident, that the bourgeoisie
is unfit any longer to be the ruling class in society , and to impose its conditions of
existence upon society as an over-riding law. It is unfit to rule because it is
incompetent to assure an existence to its slave within his slavery , because it cannot
help lettin g him sink into such a state, that it has to feed him, instead of being fed by
him. Society can no longer live under  this bourgeoisie, in other words, its existence is
no longer compatible with society .
The essential conditions for the exist ence and for the sway of the bourgeois class is
the formation and augmentation of capital; the condition for capital is wage-labour .
Wage-labour rests exclusively on competition between the labourers. The advance of
industry , whose involuntary promoter  is the bourgeoisie, replaces the isolation of the
labourers, due to competition, by the revolutionary combination, due to association.
The deve lopment of Modern Industry , therefore, cuts from under its feet the very
foundation on which the bourgeoisie  produces and appropriates products. What the
bourgeoisie therefo re produces, above all, are its own grave-diggers. Its fall and the
victory of the proletariat are equally inevitable.
II. Pr oletarians and Communists
In what relation do the Communis ts stand to the proletarians as a whole? The
Communists do not form a separate party opposed to the other working-cl ass parties.
They have no interests separate and apart from those of the proletariat as a whole.
They do not set up any sectarian principles of their own, by which to shape and mould
the proletarian movement.
The Communists are distinguished from the other working-class parties by this only:
1. In the national struggles of the proletarians of the different countries, they point out
and bring to the front the common interests of the entire proletariat, independently of
all nationality . 2. In the various stages of development which the struggle of the
working class against the bourgeoisie has to pass through, they always and
everywhere represent the interests of the movement as a whole.
The Com munists, therefore, are on the one hand, practically , the most advanced and
resolute section of the working-clas s parties of every country , that section which
pushes forward all others; on the other hand, theoretically , they have over the great
mass of the proleta riat the advantage of clearly understanding the line of march, the
conditions, and the ultimate general results of the proletarian movement.
71The immediate aim of the Communists is the same as that of all other proletarian
parties: formation  of the proletariat into a class, overthrow of the bourgeois