I. Producti on and Wages
Citizen Weston's argument rested, in fact, upon two premises: firstly , the amount of
national production is a fixed thing, a constant quantity or magnitude, as the
mathematicians would say; secondly , that the amount of real wages, that is to say, of
wages as measured by the quantity of the commodities they can buy, is a fixed
amount, a constant magnitude.
Now , his first assertion is evidently erroneous. Year after year you will find that the
value and mass of production increase, that the productive powers of the national
labour increase, and that the amount of money necessary to circulate this increasing
production continu ously changes. What is true at the end of the year, and for different
years compared with each other , is true for every average day of the year. The amount
or magnit ude of national production changes continuously . It is not a constant but a
variable magnitude , and apart from changes in population it must be so, because of
the contin uous change in the accumu lation of capital and the productive  powers of
labour . It is perfectly true that if a rise in the general rate of wages should take place
today , that rise, whatever its ulterior effects might be, would, by itself, not
immediately change the amount of production. It would, in the first instance, proceed
from the existing state of things. But if before the rise of wages the national
production was variable, and not fixed, it will continue to be variable and not fixed
after the rise of wages.
But suppo se the amount of national production to be constant instead of variable.
Even then, what our friend Weston considers a logical conclusion would still remain a
gratuitous assertion. If I have a given number , say eight, the absolute limits of this
124number do not prevent its parts from changing their relative limits. If profits were six
and wages two, wages might increase to six and profits decrease to two, and still the
total amount remain eight. The fixed amount of production would by no means prove
the fixed amount of wages. How then does our friend Weston prove this fixity? By
asserting it.
But even conceding him his assertion,  it would cut both ways, while he presses it only
in one direction. If the amount of wages is a constant magnitude, then it can be neither
increased nor diminished. If then, in enforcing a temporary rise of wages, the working
men act foolishly , the capitalists, in enforcing a temporary fall of wages, would act not
less foolishly . Our friend Weston does not deny that, under certain circumstances, the
working men can enforce a rise of wages, but their amount being naturally fixed,
there must follow a reaction. On the other hand, he knows also that the capitalists can
enforce a fall of wages, and, indeed, continuously try to enforce it. Accor ding to the
principle of the constancy of wages, a reaction ought to follow in this case not less
than in the former . The working men, therefore, reacting against the attempt at, or the
act of, lowering wages, would act rightly . They would, therefore, act rightly in
enforcing a rise of wages , because every reaction  against the lowering of wages is an
action  for raising wages. According to Citizen Weston's own principle of the
constancy of wages , the working men ought, therefore, under certain circumstances, to
combine and struggle for a rise of wages. If he denies this conclusion, he must give up
the premise from which it flows. He must not say that the amount of wages is a
constant quantity , but that, although  it cannot and must not rise, it can and must fall,
whenever capital pleases to lower it. If the capitalist pleases to feed you upon potatoes
instead of upon meat, and upon oats instead of upon wheat, you must accept his will
as a law of political economy , and submit to it. If in one country the rate of wages is
higher than in another , in the United States, for example, than in England , you must
explain this difference in the rate of wages by a difference between the will of the
American capitalis t and the will of the English capitalist, a method which would
certainly very much simplify , not only the study of economic phenomena , but of all
other phenomena.
But even then, we might ask, why the will of the American capitalist differs from the
will of the English capitalist? And to answer the question you must go beyond the
domain of will. A person may tell me that God wills one thing in France, and another
thing in England. If I summon him to explain this duality of will, he might have the
brass to answer me that God wills to have one will in France and another will in
England. But our friend Weston is certainly the last man to make an argument of such
a complete negation of all reasoning.
The will of the capitalist is certainly to take as much as possible. What we have to do
is not to talk about his will, but to enquire into his power , the limits of that power , and
the character of those limits .
II. Producti on, Wages, Profits
The address Citizen Weston read to us might have been compressed into a nutshell.
All his reasoning amounted to this: If the working class forces the capital ist class to
pay five shillings instead of four shillings in the shape of money wages, the capitalist
125will return in the shape of commodities four shillings' worth instead of five shillings'
worth. The working class would have  to pay five shillings for what, before  the rise of
wages, they bought with four shillings. But why is this the case? Why does the
capitalist only return four shillings' worth for five shillings? Because the amount of
wages is fixed. By why is it fixed at four shillings' worth of commodities? Why not at
three, or two, or any other sum? If the limit of the amount of wages is settled by an
economical law, independent alike of the will of the capitalist and the will of the
working man, the first thing Citizen Weston had to do was to state that law and prove
it. He ought then, moreover , to have proved that the amount of wages actually paid at
every given moment always corresponds exactly to the necessary amount  of wages,
and never deviates from it. If, on the other hand, the given limit of the amount of
wages is founded on the mere will of the capitalist, or the limits of his avarice, it is an
arbitrary limit. There is nothing necessary in it. It may be changed by the will of the
capitalist, and may , therefore, be changed against  his will.
Citizen Weston illustrated his theory by telling you that a bowl contains a certain
quantity of soup, to be eaten by a certain number of persons, an incre ase in the
broadness of the spoons would produce no increase in the amount of soup . He must
allow me to find this illustration rather spoony . It reminded me somew hat of the
simile employed by Menenius Agrippa. When the Roman plebeians struck against the
Roman patricians, the patrician Agrippa told them that the patrician belly fed the
plebeian members  of the body politic. Agrippa failed to show that you feed the
members of one man by filling the belly of another . Citizen Weston, on his part, has
forgotten that the bowl from which the workmen eat is filled with the whole produce
of national labour , and that what prevents them fetching more out of it is neither the
narrowness of the bowl nor the scantiness of its contents, but only the smallness of
their spoons.
By what contrivan ce is the capitalist  enabled to return four shillings' worth for five
shillings? By raising the price of the commodity he sells. Now , does a rise and more
generally a change in the prices of commodities, do the prices of commodities
themselves, depend  on the mere will of the capitalist? Or are, on the contrary , certain
circumstances wanted to give effect to that will? If not, the ups and downs, the
incessant fluctuations of market prices, become an insoluble riddle.
As we suppose that no change whatever has taken place either in the productive
powers of labour , or in the amount of capital and labour employed, or in the value of
the money  wherein  the values of products are estimated, but only a change in the rate
of wages , how could that rise of wages  affect the prices of commodities ? Only by
affecting the actual proportion between the demand for, and the supply of these
commodities.
It is perfectly true that, considered as a whole, the working class spends, and must
spend, its income upon necessaries . A general rise in the rate of wages would,
therefore, produce a rise in the demand for, and consequently in the market prices of
necessaries . The capitalists who produce these necessaries would be compensated for
the risen wages by the rising market  prices of their commodities. But how with the
other capitalists who do not produce necessaries? And you must not fancy them a
126small body . If you consider that two-thirds of the national produce are consumed by
one-fifth of the population - a membe r of the House of Commons stated it recently to
be but one-seventh of the population - you will understand what an immense
proportion of the national produce must be produced in the shape of luxuries, or be
exchanged  for luxur ies, and what an immense amount of the necessaries themselves
must be wasted upon flunkeys, horses, cats, and so forth, a waste we know from
experience to become always much limited with the rising prices of necessaries.
Well, what would be the position of those capitalists who do not produce necessaries?
For the fall in the rate of profit, consequent upon the general rise of wages, they could
not comp ensate themselves by a rise in the price of their commodities , because  the
demand for those commodities would not have increased. Their income would have
decreased, and from this decreased income they would have to pay more for the same
amount of higher -priced necessaries. But this would not be all. As their income had
diminished they would have less to spend upon luxuries, and therefore their mutual