themselves. Thus, in imagination, individuals seem freer under the dominance of the
bourgeoisie than before, because their conditions of life seem accidental; in reality , of
course, they are less free, because they are more subjected to the violence  of things.
The difference from the estate comes out particularly in the antagonism between the
bourgeoisie and the proletariat. When the estate of the urban burghers, the
corporations, etc. emer ged in opposition to the landed nobility , their condition of
existence - movable property and craft labour , which had already existed latently
before their separa tion from the feudal ties - appeared as something positive, which
was asserted against feudal landed property , and, therefore, in its own way at first took
on a feudal form. Certainly the refugee serfs treated their previous servitude as
something accidental to their personality . But here they only were doing what every
class that is freeing itself from a fetter does; and they did not free themselves as a
class but separately . Moreover , they did not rise above the system of estates, but only
formed a new estate, retaining their previous mode of labour even in their new
situation, and developing it further by freeing it from its earlier fetters, which no
longer corresponded to the development already attained.
N.B. - It must not be forgotten that the serf's very need of existing and the
impossibility of a large-scale econ omy, which involved the distribution of the
allotments among the serfs, very soon reduced the services of the serfs to their lord to
an average of payments in kind and statute-labour . This made it possible for the serf to
accumulate movable property and hence facilitated his escape out of the possession of
his lord and gave him the prospect of making his way as an urban citizen; it also
created gradations  among the serfs,  so that the runaway serfs were already half
burghers. It is likewise obvious that the serfs who were masters of a craft had the best
chance of acquiring movable property .
For the proletarians, on the other hand, the condition of their existence, labour , and
with it all the conditions of existence governing modern society , have become
something accidental, something over which they, as separate individuals, have no
control, and over which no socia l organisation can give them control. The
contradiction between the individual ity of each separate proletarian and labour , the
condition of life forced upon him, becomes evident to him himself, for he is sacrificed
from youth upwards and, within his own class, has no chance of arriving at the
conditions which would place him in the other class.
Thus, while the refugee serfs only wished to be free to develop and assert those
conditions of existence which were already there, and hence, in the end, only arrived
at free labour, the proletarians, if they are to assert themselves as individuals, will
have to abolish the very condition of their existence hitherto (which has, moreover ,
been that of all society up to the present), namely , labour . Thus they find themselves
directly opposed to the form in which, hitherto, the individuals, of which society
consists, have given themselves collective expression, that is, the State. In order ,
therefore, to assert themselves as individuals, they must overthrow the State.
54It follows from all we have been saying up till now that the communal relationship
into whic h the individuals of a class entered, and which was determine d by their
common interests over against a third party , was always a community to which these
individuals belonge d only as average individuals, only insofar as they lived within the
conditions of existence of their class - a relationship in which they participated not as
individuals but as members of a class. With the community of revolutionary
proletarians, on the other hand, who take their conditions of existence and those of all
members of society under their control, it is just the reverse; it is as individuals that
the indivi duals participate in it. It is just this combination of individuals (assuming the
advanced stage of modern productive  forces, of course) which puts the conditions of
the free developme nt and movement of individuals under their control - conditions
which were previously abandoned to chance and had won an independent existence
over against the separate individuals just because of their separation as individuals,
and because of the necessity of their combination which had been determi ned by the
division of labour , and through their separation had become a bond alien to them.
Combination up till now (by no means an arbitrary one, such as is expo unded for
example in the Contrat social , but a necessary one) was an agreement upon these
conditions, within which the individ uals were free to enjoy the freaks of fortune
(compare, e.g., the formation of the North American State and the South American
republics). This right to the undisturbed enjoyment, within certain conditions, of
fortuity and chance  has up till now been called personal freedom. These conditions of
existence are, of course, only the productive forces and forms of intercou rse at any
particular time.
Forms of Intercourse
Communism differs from all previous movements in that it overturns the basis of all
earlier relations of production and intercourse, and for the first time consciously treats
all natura l premise s as the creatures of hitherto existing men, strips them of their
natural character and subjugates them to the power of the united individuals. Its
organisation is, therefore, essentiall y economic, the material production of the
conditions of this unity; it turns existing conditions into conditions of unity . The
reality , which communism is creating, is precisely the true basis for rendering it
impossible that anything should exist  independently of individuals, insofar as reality
is only a product of the preceding intercourse of individuals themselves. Thus the
communists in practice treat the conditions created up to now by production and
intercourse as inorganic conditions, without, however , imagining that it was the plan
or the destiny of previous generation s to give them material, and without believing
that these conditions were inor ganic for the individuals creating them.
Contradiction between individuals and their conditions of life
as contradiction between productive forces and the form of
intercourse
The difference between the individual  as a person and what is accidental to him, is not
a conceptual difference but an historical fact. This distinction has a different
55significance at different times - e.g. the estate as something accidental to the
individual in the eighteenth century , the family more or less too. It is not a distinction
that we have to make for each age, but one which each age makes itself from among
the different elements which it finds  in existence, and indeed not according to any
theory , but compelled by material collisions in life.
What appears accidental to the later age as opposed to the earlier - and this applies
also to the elements handed down by an earlier age - is a form of intercourse which
corresponded to a definite stage of development of the productive forces. The relation
of the productive forces to the form  of intercourse is the relation of the form of
intercourse to the occupation or activity of the individuals. (The fundamental form of
this activity is, of course, material, on which depend all other forms - mental, political,
religious, etc. The various shaping of material life is, of course, in every case
dependent on the needs which are already developed, and the production,  as well as
the satisfa ction, of these needs is an historical process, which is not found in the case
of a sheep or a dog (Stirner's refractory principal argument adversus hominem ),
although sheep and dogs in their present form certainly , but malgré eux, are products
of an historical process.) The conditions under which individuals have intercourse
with each other , so long as the above-mentioned contradiction is absent, are
conditions appertaining to their individuality , in no way external to them; conditions
under which these definite individual s, living under definite relationships, can alone
produce their material life and what is connected with it, are thus the conditions of
their self-activity and are produced by this self-activity . The definite condition under
which they produce, thus corresponds, as long as the contradiction has not yet
appeared, to the reality of their conditioned nature, their one-sided existence, the one-
sidedness of which only becomes evident when the contradiction enters on the scene
and thus exists for the later individua ls. Then this condition appears as an accidental
fetter , and the consciousness that it is a fetter is imputed to the earlier age as well.
These various conditions, which appear first as conditions of self-activity , later as
fetters upon it, form in the whole evolution of history a coherent series of forms of
intercourse, the coherence of which consists in this: in the place of an earlier form of
intercourse, which has become a fetter, a new one is put, corresponding to the more
developed producti ve forces and, hence, to the advanced mode of the self-activity of
individuals - a form which in its turn becomes a fetter and is then replaced by another .
Since these conditi ons correspond at every stage to the simultaneous development of
the produ ctive forces, their history is at the same time the history of the evolving
productive forces taken over by each new generation, and is, therefore, the history of
the development of the forces of the individuals themselves.
Since this evolution takes place naturally , i.e. is not subordinated to a general plan of
freely combined individuals, it proceeds from various localities, tribes, nations,