continuance, they are constantly tending towards it."
I cannot now sift this matter . It suffices to say the if supply and deman d equilibrate
each other , the market prices of commodities will correspond with their natural prices,
that is to say with their values, as determined by the respective quantitie s of labour
required for their production. But supply and demand must  constantly tend to
equilibrate each other , although they do so only by compensating one fluctuation by
another , a rise by a fall, and vice versa . If instea d of considering only the daily
fluctuations you analyze the movem ent of market prices for longer periods, as Mr.
Tooke, for example, has done in his History of Prices , you will find that the
fluctuations of market prices, their deviations from values, their ups and downs,
paralyze and comp ensate each other; so that apart from the effect of monopolies and
some other modific ations I must now pass by, all descriptions of commodities are, on
average, sold at their respective values  or natural prices. The average periods during
which the fluctuations of market prices compensate each other are different for
different kinds of commodities, becau se with one kind it is easier to adapt supply to
demand than with the other .
If then, speaking broadly , and embracing somewhat longer periods, all descriptions of
commodities sell at their respective values, it is nonsense to suppose that profit, not in
individual cases; but that the constant  and usual profits of different trades spring from
the prices  of commodities, or selling them at a price over and above their value . The
absurdity of this notion becomes evident if it is generalized. What a man would
constantly win as a seller he would constantly lose as a purchaser . It would not do to
say that there are men who are buye rs without being sellers, or consumers without
being producers. What these people pay to the producers, they must first get from
them for nothing. If a man first takes  your money and afterwards returns that money
in buying your commodities, you will never enrich yourselves by selling your
commodities too dear to that same man. This sort of transaction might diminish a loss,
but would never help in realizing a profit. To explain, therefore, the general nature of
profits, you must start from the theorem that, on an average, commodities are sold at
their real values , and that profits are derived from selling them at their values , that is,
in propor tion to the quantity of labou r realized in them. If you cannot explain profit
upon this supposition, you cannot explain it at all. This seems paradox and contrary to
every-day observation. It is also parad ox that the earth moves round the sun, and that
water consists of two highly inflammable gases. Scientific truth is always paradox, if
judged by every-day experience, which catches only the delusive appearance of
things.
141VII. Labour Power
Having now, as far as it could be done in such a cursory manner , analyzed the nature
of value , of the value of any comm odity whatever , we must  turn our attention to the
specific value of labour . And here, again, I must startle you by a seeming paradox. All
of you feel sure that what they daily sell is their Labour; that, therefore, Labour has a
Price, and that, the price of a commo dity being only the monetary expres sion of its
value, there must certainly exist such a thing as the value of labour . However , there
exists no such thing as the value of labour  in the common acceptance of the word. We
have seen that the amount of necessary labour crystallized in a commodity constitutes
its value. Now , applying this notion of value, how could we define, say, the value of a
ten hours working day? How much labour is contained in that day? Ten hours' labour .
To say that the value of a ten hours working day is equal to ten hours' labour , or the
quantity of labour contained in it, would be a tautological and, moreover , a
nonsensical expression. Of course, having once found out the true but hidden sense of
the expression "value of labour ," we shall be able to interpret this irrational, and
seemingly impossi ble application of value, in the same way that, having once made
sure of the real movement of the celestial bodies, we shall be able to explain their
apparent or merely phenomenal movements.
What the working man sells is not directly his labour , but his labouring power , the
temporary disposal of which he makes over to the capitalist. This is so much the case
that I do not know whether by the English Laws, but certainly by some Continental
Laws, the maximum time is fixed for which  a man is allowed to sell his labouring
power . If allowed to do so for any indefinite period whatever , slavery would be
immediately restored. Such a sale, if it comprised his lifetime, for example, would
make him at once the lifelong slave of his employer .
One of the oldest economists and most original philosophers of England - Thomas
Hobbes - has already , in his Leviathan, instinctively hit upon this point overlooked by
all his successors. He says: "the value or worth of a man is, as in all other things, his
price : that is so much as would be given for the use of his power ." Proceeding from
this basis, we shall be able to determine the value of labour  as that of all other
commodities.
But befor e doing so, we might ask, how does this strange phenomenon arise, that we
find on the market a set of buyers, possessed of land, machinery , raw material, and the
means of subsistence, all of them, save land in its crude state, the products of labour ,
and on the other hand, a set of sellers who have nothing to sell except their labouring
power , their worki ng arms and brains? That the one set buys continually in order to
make a profit and enrich themselves,  while the other set continually sells in order to
earn their livelihood? The inquiry into this question would be an inquiry into what the
economists call "previous or original accumulation ," but which ough t to be called
original expropriation . We should find that this so-called original accumulation
means nothing but a series of historic al processes, resulting in a decomposition  of the
original union  existing between the labouring Man and his Instruments of Labour .
Such an inquiry , however , lies beyond the pale of my present subject. The separation
between the Man of Labour and the Instruments of Labour once establish ed, such a
142state of things will maintain itself and reproduce itself upon a constantly increasing
scale, until a new and fundamental revolution in the mode of production should again
overturn it, and restore the original union in a new historical form.
What, then, is the value of labouring power ?
Like that of every other commodity , its value is determined by the quantity of labour
necessary to produce it. The labouring power of a man exists only in his living
individuality . A certain mass of neces saries must be consumed by a man to grow up
and maintain his life. But the man, like the machine, will wear out, and must be
replaced by another man. Beside the mass of necessaries required for his own
maintenance, he wants another amount of necessaries to bring up a certai n quota of
children that are to replace him on the labour market and to perpetuate the race of
labourers. Moreov er, to develop his labouring power , and acquire a given skill,
another amount of values must be spent. For our purpose it suffices to consider only
average  labour, the costs  of whose educ ation and development are vanish ing
magnitudes. Still I must seize upon this occasion to state that, as the costs of
producing labouring powers of different quality differ, so much differ the values of the
labouring powers employed in different trades. The cry for an equality of wages  rests,
therefore, upon a mistake, is an insane wish never to be fulfilled. It is an offspring of
that false  and superficial radicalism that accepts premisses and tries to evade
conclusions. Upon the basis of the wages system the value of labouring power is
settled like that of every other commodity; and as different kinds of labouring power
have different values, or require different quantities of labour for their production,
they must  fetch different prices in the labour market. To clamour for equal or even
equitable  retribution  on the basis of the wages system is the same as to clamour for
freedom  on the basis of the slavery system. What you think just or equitable is out of
the question. The question is: What is necessary and unavoidable with a given system
of production? After what has been said, it will be seen that the value of labouring
power  is determined by the value of the necessaries  required to produce, develop,
maintain, and perpetuate the labouring power .
VIII. Producti on of Su rplus Value
Now supp ose that the average amount of the daily necessaries of a labouring man
require six hours of averag e labour  for their production. Suppose, moreover , six hours
of average labour to be also realized in a quantity of gold equal to 3s. Then  3s. would
be the price , or the monetary expression of the daily value  of that man's labouring
power . If he worked daily six hours he would daily produce a value sufficient to buy
the average amount of his daily necessaries, or to maintain himself as a labouring
man.
But our man is a wages labourer . He must, therefore, sell his labouring power to a
capitalist. If he sells it at 3s. daily , or 18s. weekly , he sells it at its value. Suppose him
to be a spinner . If he works six hours daily he will add to the cotton a value of 3s.
daily . This value, daily added by him, would be an exact equivalent for the wages, or
the price of his labouring power , received daily . But in that case no surplus value  or
surplus pr oduce  whatever would go to the capitalist. Here, then, we come to the rub.