sequence is determined, rather , by their relation to one another in modern bourgeois
society , which is precisely the opposite of that which seems to be their natural order or
which corresponds to historical development. The point is not the historic position of
the economic relations in the succession of different forms of society . Even less is it
their sequence ‘in the idea’  (Proudh on) (a muddy notion of historic movem ent).
Rather , their order within modern bour geois society .
The purity (abstract specificity) in which the trading peoples - Phoenicians,
Carthaginians - appear in the old world is determined precisely by the predominance
of the agricultural peoples. Capital, as trading-capital or as money-capital, appears in
this abstraction precisely where capital is not yet the predominant element of
societies. Lombards, Jews take up the same position towards the agricultural societies
of the Middle Ages.
As a further example of the diver gent positions which the same category can occupy
in different social stages: one of the latest forms of bourgeois society , joint-stock
120companies.  These also appea r, however , at its beginning, in the great, privileged
monopoly trading companies.
The concept of national wealth creeps into the work of the economists of the
seventeenth century - continuing partly with those of the eighteenth - in the form of
the notio n that wealth is created only to enrich the state, and that its power is
proportionate to this wealth. This was the still unconsciously hypocritical form in
which wealth and the production of wealth proclaimed themselves as the purpose of
modern states, and regarded these states henceforth only as means for the production
of wealth.
The order obviously has to be (1) the general, abstract determinants which obtain in
more or less all forms of society , but in the above-explained sense. (2) The categories
which make up the inner structure of bourgeois society and on which the fundamental
classes rest. Capital, wage labour , landed property . Their interrelation. Town and
country . The three great social classe s. Exchange between them. Circulation. Credit
system (private). (3) Concentration of bourgeois society in the form of the state.
Viewed in relation to itself. The ‘unproductive’  classes. Taxes. State debt. Public
credit. The population. The colonies . Emigration. (4) The international relation of
production. International division of labour . International exchange. Export and
import. Rate of exchange. (5) The world market and crises.
(4) Pr oduction. Means of Production and
Relations of Pr oduction.
Relations of Production and Relations of Circulation. Forms of
the State and Forms of Consciousness in Relation to Relations
of Production and Circulation. Legal Relations. Family
Relations.
Notabene  in regard to points to be mentioned here and not to be for gotten:
(1) War develope d earlier than peace; the way in which certain economic relatio ns
such as wage labour , machinery etc. develop earlier , owing to war and in the armies
etc., than in the interior of bourgeois society . The relation of productive  force and
relations of exchange also especially vivid in the army .
(2) Relation of previous ideal historiography to the real. Namely of the so-called
cultural histories,  which are only histories of religions and of states. (On that occasion
something can also be said about the various kinds of previous historiography . The so-
called objective. Subjective (moral among others). The philosophical.)
(3) Secondary and tertiary  matters; in gener al, derivative, inherited,  not original
relations of production. Influence here of international relations.
(4) Accusations about the materialism of this conception. Relation to naturalistic
materialism.
(5) Dialectic of the concepts productive force (means of production) and relation of
production,  a dialectic whose boundaries are to be determined, and which does not
121suspend the real dif ference.
(6) The uneven development of mate rial production relative to e.g. artistic
development.  In gener al, the concept of progress not to be conceived in the usual
abstractness. Modern art etc. This disproportion not as important or so difficult to
grasp as within practical-social relati ons themselves. E.g. the relation of education.
Relation of the United States to Europe. But the really difficult point to discuss here is
how relations of production develop unevenly as legal relations. Thus e.g. the relation
of Roman private law (this less the case with criminal and public law) to modern
production.
(7) This conc eption appears as necessary development.  But legitimation of chance.
How . (Of freedom also, among other things.) (Influence of means of comm unication.
World history has not always existed; history as world history a result.)
(8) The point  of departur e obviously from the natural characteristic;  subjectiv ely and
objectively . Tribes, races etc.
(1) In the case of the arts, it is well known that certain periods of their flowering are
out of all proportio n to the general development of society , hence also to the material
foundation, the skeletal structure as it were, of its organization. For example, the
Greeks compared to the moderns or also Shakespeare. It is even recognized that
certain forms of art, e.g. the epic, can no longer be produced in their world epoch-
making, classical stature as soon as the production of art, as such, begins; that is, that
certain significant forms within the realm of the arts are possible only at an
undeveloped stage of artistic development. If this is the case with the relation between
different kinds of art within the realm of the arts, it is already less puzzling that it is
the case in the relation of the entire realm to the general development of society . The
difficulty consists only in the general formulation of these contradictions. As soon as
they have been specified, they are already clarified.
Let us take e.g. the relation of Greek art and then of Shakespeare to the present time.
It is well known that Greek mythology is not only the arsenal of Greek art but also its
foundation. Is the view of nature and of social relations on which the Greek
imagination and hence Greek [mythology] is based possible with self-acting mule
spindles and railways and locomotiv es and electrical telegraphs? What chance has
Vulcan against Roberts and Co., Jupit er against the lightning-rod and Herm es against
the Credit Mobilier? All mythology overcomes and dominates and shapes the forces
of nature in the imagination and by the imagination; it therefore vanishe s with the
advent of real mastery over them. What becomes of Fama alongside Printing House
Square? Greek art presupposes Gree k mythology , i.e. nature and the social forms
already reworked in an unconsciously artistic way by the popular imagination. This is
its materi al. Not any mythology whatever , i.e. not an arbitrarily chosen unconsciously
artistic reworking of nature (here meaning everything objective, hence including
society). Egyptian mythology could never have been the foundation or the womb of
Greek art. But, in any case, a mythology . Hence, in no way a social develop ment
which excludes all mythological, all mythologizing relations to nature; which
therefore demands of the artist an imagination not dependent on mythology .
122From another side:  is Achilles possible with powder and lead? Or the Iliad  with the
printing press, not to mention the printing machine? Do not the song and the saga and
the muse necessarily come to an end with the printer ’s bar, hence do not the necessary
conditions of epic poetry vanish?
But the difficulty lies not in understa nding that the Greek arts and epic are bound up
with certa in forms of social development. The difficulty is that they still afford us
artistic pleasure and that in a certain respect they count as a norm and as an
unattainable model.
A man cannot become a child again, or he becomes childish. But does he not find joy
in the child’ s naïvité, and must he himself not strive to reproduce its truth at a higher
stage? Does not the true character of each epoch come alive in the nature of its
children? Why should not the histo ric childhood of humanity , its most beautiful
unfolding, as a stage never to return, exercise an eternal charm? There are unruly
children and preco cious children. Many of the old peoples belong in this category .
The Greeks were normal children. The charm of their art for us is not in contradiction
to the undeveloped stage of society on which it grew . [It] is its result, rather , and is
inextricably bound  up, rather , with the fact that the unripe social condit ions under
which it arose, and could alone arise, can never return.
123Marx, Value, Price and Profit (1865)
Preliminary
CITIZENS,
Before entering into the subject-matter , allow me to make a few preliminar y remarks.
There reigns now on the Continent a real epidemic of strikes, and a gener al clamour
for a rise of wages. The question will turn up at our Congress. You, as the head of the
International Asso ciation, ought to have settled convictions upon this paramount
question. For my own part, I conside red it therefore my duty to enter fully into the
matter , even at the peril of putting your patience to a severe test.
Another preliminary remark I have to make in regard to Citizen Weston. He has not
only proposed to you, but has publicly defended, in the interest of the working class,
as he thinks, opinio ns he knows to be most unpopular with the working class. Such an
exhibition of moral courage all of us must highly honour . I hope that, despite the
unvarnished style of my paper , at its conclusion he will find me agreeing  with what
appears to me the just idea lying at the bottom of his theses, which, however , in their
present form, I cannot but consider theoretically false and practically dangerous.
I shall now at once proceed to the business before us.