draw the veil over this specific relationship and this intrinsic connection.
Although the excess value of a commodity over its cost-price is shaped in the
immediate process of production, it is realised only in the process of circulation, and
appears all the more readily to have arisen from the process of circulatio n, since in
reality , under competition, in the actual market, it depends on market conditions
whether or not and to what extent this surplus is realised. There is no need to waste
words at this point about the fact that if a commodity is sold above or below its value,
there is merely another kind of division of surplus-value, and that this different
division, this changed proportion in which various persons share in the surplus-value,
does not in any way alter either the magnitude or the nature of that surplus-value. It is
not alone the metamorphoses discussed by us in Book II that take place in the process
of circulation; they fall in with actual competition, the sale and purchase of
commodities abov e or below their value, so that the surplus-value realised by the
individual capitalis t depends as much  on the sharpness of his business wits as on the
direct exploitation of labour .
179In the process of circulation the time of circulation comes to exert its influence
alongside the working-time, thereby limiting the amount of surplus-value realisable
within a given time span. Still other elements derived from circulation intrude
decisively into the actual production process. The actual process of production and the
process of circulat ion intertwine and intermingle continually , and thereby invariably
adulterate their typical distinctive features. The production of surplus-value, and of
value in general, receives new definition in the process of circulation, as previously
shown. Capital passes through the circuit of its metamorphoses. Finally , stepping
beyond its inner organic life, so to say, it enters into relations with outer life, into
relations in which it is not capital and labour which confront one another , but capital
and capital in one case, and individuals, again simply as buyers and sellers, in the
other . The time of circulation and working-time cross paths and thus both seem to
determine the surplus-value. The original form in which capital and wage-labour
confront one another is disguised through the intervention of relationships seemingly
independent of it. Surplus-value itself does not appear as the product of the
appropriation of labour -time, but as an excess of the selling price of commodities over
their cost-price, the latter thus being easily represented as their actual value (valeur
intrinsèque ), while profit appears as an excess of the selling price of commodities
over their immanent value.
True, the nature of surplus-value impresses itself constantly upon the consciousness of
the capita list durin g the process of production, as his greed for the labour -time of
others, etc., has revealed in our analysis of surplus-value. But: 1) The actual process
of production is only a fleeting stage  which continually merges with the process of
circulation, just as the latter merges with the former , so that in the process of
production, the more or less clearly dawning notion of the source of the gain made in
it, i.e., the inkling of the nature of surplus-value, stands at best as a factor equally
valid as the idea that the realised surplus originates in a movement that is independent
of the production process, that it arises in circulation, and that it belongs to capital
irrespective of the latter ’s relation to labour . Even such modern econ omists as
Ramsay , Malthus, Senior , Torrens, etc., identify these phenomena of circulation
directly as proofs that capital in its bare material existence, independent of its social
relation to labour which makes capita l of it, is, as it were, an independent source of
surplus-value alongside labour and independent of labour . 2) Under the item of
expenses, which embrace wages as well as the price of raw materials, wear and tear of
machinery , etc., the extortion of unpa id labour figures only as a saving in paying for
an article  which is included in expe nses, only as a smaller payment for a certain
quantity of labour , similar to the saving when raw materials are bought more cheaply ,
or the depreciation of machinery decreases. In this way the extortion of surplus-labour
loses its specific character . Its specific relationship to surplus-value is obscured. This
is greatly furthered and facilitated, as shown in Book I, by representing the value of
labour -power in the form of wages.
The relationships of capital are obscured by the fact that all parts of capital appear
equally as the source of excess value (profit).
The way in which surplus-value is transformed into the form of profit by way of the
rate of profit is, however , a further development of the inversion of subject  and object
180that takes place already in the process of production. In the latter , we have seen, the
subjective productive forces of labour appear as productive forces of capital. On the
one hand, the value, or the past labour , which dominates living labour , is incarnated in
the capitalist. On the other hand, the labourer appears as bare material labour -power ,
as a comm odity . Even in the simple relations of production this inverted relationship
necessarily produces certain corres pondingly inverted conceptions, a transposed
consciousness whic h is further developed by the metamorphoses and modif ications of
the actual circulation process.
It is altogether erroneous, as a study of the Ricardian school shows, to try to identify
the laws of the rate of profit with the laws of the rate of surplus-value, or vice versa.
The capitalist naturally does not see the difference between them. In the formula s/C
the surplu s-value is measured by the value of the total capital advanced for its
production, of which a part was totally consumed in this production and a part was
merely employed in it. In fact, the formula s/C expresses the degree of self-expansion
of the total capital advanced, or, taken in conformity with inner conceptual
connections and the nature of surplu s-value, it indicates the ratio of the amount of
variation of variable capital to the magnitude of the advanced total capital.
In itself, the magn itude of value of total capital has no inner relationship to the
magnitude of surplus-value, at least not directly . So far as its material elements are
concerned, the total capital minus the variable capital, that is, the consta nt capital,
consists of the material requisites – the means of labour and materials of labour –
needed to materialise labour . It is necessary to have a certain quantity of means and
materials of labour for a specific quan tity of labour to materialise in commodities and
thereby to produce  value. A definite technical relation depending on the special nature
of the labour applied is established between the quantity of labour and the quantity of
means of production to which this labour is to be applied. Hence there is also to that
extent a definite relation between the quantity of surplus-value, or surplus-labour , and
the quantity of means of production. For instance, if the labour necessary for the
production of the wage amounts to a daily 6 hours, the labourer must work 12 hours
to do 6 hours of surplus-labour , or produce a surplus-value of 100%. He uses up twice
as much of the means of production in 12 hours as he does in 6. Yet this is no reason
for the surplus-value produced by him in 6 hours to be directly related to the value of
the means of production used up in those 6, or in 12 hours. This value is here
altogether immater ial; it is only a matter of the technically required quantity . It does
not matter whether the raw materials or means of labour are cheap or dear, as long as
they have the required use-value and are available in technically prescribed  proportion
to the labour to be applied. If I know that x lbs. of cotton are consumed in an hour of
spinning and that they cost a shillings, then, of course, I also know that 12 hours’
spinning consumes 12x lbs. of cotto n = 12 a shillings, and can then calculate the
proportion of the surplus-value to the value of the 12 as well as to that of the 6. But
the relation of living labour to the value  of means of production obtains here only to
the extent that a shillings serve as a name for x lbs. of cotton; because a definite
quantity of cotton has a definite price , and therefore, conversely , a definite price may
also serve  as an index for a definite quantity of cotton, so long as the price of cotton
does not change. If I know that the labourer must work 12 hours for me to appropriate
1816 hours of surplus-labour , that therefore I must have a 12-hour supply of cotton ready
for use, and if I know the price of this quantity of cotton needed for 12 hours, then I
have an indirect relation between the price of cotton (as an index of the required
quantity) and the surplus-value. But, conversely , I can never conclude the quantity of
the raw material that may be consumed in, say, one hour, and not 6, of spinning from
the price of the raw material. There is, then, no necessary inner relation between the
value of the constant capital, nor, therefore, between the value of the total capital
(=c+v) and the surplus-value.
If the rate of surplus-value is known and its magnitude given, the rate of profit
expresses nothing but what it actually is, namely a different way of measuring
surplus-value, its measurement according to the value of the total capital instead of
the value of the portion of capital from which surplus-value directly origina tes by way
of its exchange for labour . But in reality (i.e., in the world of phenomena) the matter is
reversed. Surplus-v alue is given, but given as an excess of the selling price of the