the owner of privat e property , if he does not wish to see his property and hence his jus
50abutendi  pass into other hands, since actually the thing, considered merely with
reference to his will, is not a thing at all, but only becomes a thing, true property in
intercourse, and independently of the law (a relationship, which the philosophers call
an idea). This juridical illusion, which reduces law to the mere will, necessarily leads,
in the further development of property relationships, to the position that a man may
have a legal title to a thing without really having the thing. If, for instance, the income
from a piece of land is lost owing to competition, then the proprietor has certainly his
legal title to it along with the jus utendi et abuten di. But he can do nothing with it: he
owns nothing as a landed proprietor if in addition he has not enough capital to
cultivate his ground. This illusion of the jurists also explains the fact that for them, as
for every  code, it is altogether fortuitous that individuals enter into relationships
among themselves (e.g. contracts); it explains why they consider that these
relationships [can] be entered into or not at will, and that their content rests purely on
the individual [free] will of the contracting parties.
Whenever , throug h the development of industry and commerce, new forms of
intercourse have been evolved (e.g. assurance companies, etc.), the law has always
been compelled to admit them among the modes of acquiring property .
Notes, written by Marx, intended for further elaboration
12. Forms of Social Consciousness
The influence of the division of labour on science.
The role of repression with regard to the state, law , morality , etc.
It is precisely because the bourgeoisie  rules as a class that in the law it must give itself
a general expression.
Natural science and history .
There is no history of politics, law , science, etc., of art, religion, etc.
[Mar ginal note by Marx:]  To the ‘community’  as it appears in the ancient state, in
feudalism and in the absolute monarchy , to this bond correspond especially the
religious conceptions.
Why the ideologists turn everything upside-down.
Clerics, jurists, politicians.
jurists, politicians (statesmen in general), moralists, clerics.
For this ideologic al subdivision within a class: 1) The occu pation assumes an
independent existen ce owing to divisi on of labour . Everyone believes his craft to be
the true one. Illusio ns regarding the connection between their craft and reality are the
more likely to be cherished by them because of the very nature of the craft. In
consciousness - in jurisprudence, politics, etc. - relations become concepts; since they
do not go beyond these relations, the concepts of the relations also become fixed
concepts in their mind. The judge, for example, applies the code, he theref ore regards
legislation as the real, active driving force. Respect for their goods, because their craft
deals with general matters.
51Idea of law. Idea of state. The matter is turned upside-down in ordinary
consciousness.
Religion is from the outset consciousness of the transcendental  arising from actually
existing forces.
This more popularly .
Tradition, with regard to law , religion, etc.
Individuals always proceeded, and always proceed, from themselves. Their relations
are the relations of their real life-process. How does it happen that their relations
assume an independent existence over against them? and that the forces of their own
life become superior to them?
In short: division of labour , the level of which depends on the development of the
productive power at any particular time.
Landed property . Communal property . Feudal. Modern.
Estate property . Manufacturing property . Industrial capital.
D. Pr oletarians and Communism
Individuals, Class, and Community
In the Middle Ages the citizens in each town were compelled to unite against the
landed nobility to save their skins. The extension of trade, the establi shment of
communications, led the separate towns to get to know other towns, which had
asserted the same interests in the struggle with the same antagonist. Out of the many
local corporations of burghers there  arose only gradually the burgher class. The
conditions of life of the individual burghers became, on account of their contradiction
to the existing relationships and of the mode of labour determined by these, conditions
which were comm on to them all and independent of each individual. The burghers
had create d the conditions insofar as they had torn themselves free from feudal ties,
and were created by them insofar as they were determined by their antagon ism to the
feudal system which they found in existence. When the individual town s began to
enter into associations, these common conditions developed into class conditions. The
same conditions, the same contradiction, the same interests necessarily called forth on
the whole  similar customs everywhere. The bourgeoisie itself with its conditions,
develops only gradually , splits according to the division of labour into various
fractions and finally absorbs all propertied classes it finds in existence [Mar ginal note
by Marx: To begin  with it absorbs the branch es of labour directly belonging to the
State and then all ±[more or less] ideological estates].  (while it develops  the majority
of the earlier prope rtyless and a part of the hitherto propertied classes into a new class,
the prolet ariat) in the measure to whic h all property found in existence is transformed
into industrial or commercial capital. The separate individuals form a class only
insofar as they have to carry on a common battle against another class; otherwise they
are on hostile terms with each other as competitors. On the other hand, the class in its
turn achie ves an independent existenc e over against the individuals, so that the latter
find their conditions of existence predestined, and hence have their position in life and
52their personal development assigned to them by their class, become subsumed under
it. This is the same phenomenon as the subjection of the separate individuals to the
division of labour and can only be removed by the abolition of private property and of
labour itself. We have already indicated several times how this subsuming of
individuals under the class brings with it their subjection to all kinds of ideas, etc.
If from a philosoph ical point of view one considers this evolution of individ uals in the
common conditions of existence of estates and classes, which follow ed on one
another , and in the accompanying general conceptions forced upon them, it is
certainly very easy to imagine that in these individuals the species, or ‘Man’, has
evolved, or that they evolved ‘Man’  - and in this way one can give history some hard
clouts on the ear. [Mar ginal note by Marx to this sentence:  With the philosoph ers pre-
existence of the class]. One can conceive these various estates and classes to be
specific terms of the general expre ssion, subordinate varieties of the species, or
evolutionary phases of ‘Man’.
This subsuming of individuals under definite classes cannot be abolished until a class
has taken  shape, which has no longer  any particular class interest to assert against the
ruling class.
The trans formation, through the division of labour , of personal powers (relationships)
into material powers, cannot be dispelled by dismissing the general idea of it from
one's mind, but can only be abolis hed by the individuals again subjec ting these
material powers to themselves and abolishing the division of labour . This is not
possible without the community . Only in community [with others has each] individual
the means  of cultivating his gifts in all directions; only in the community , therefore, is
personal freedom possible. In the previous substitutes for the community , in the State,
etc. personal freedom has existed only for the individuals who developed within the
relationships of the ruling class, and only insofar as they were individuals of this
class. The illusory community , in which individuals have up till now combined,
always took on an independent existence in relation to them, and was at the same
time, since it was the combination of one class over against another , not only a
completely illusory community , but a new fetter as well. In a real community the
individuals obtain their freedom in and through their association.
Individuals have always built on themselves, but naturally on themselves within their
given historical conditions and relationships, not on the ‘pure’  individual in the sense
of the ideologists. But in the course of historical evolution, and precisely through the
inevitable fact that within the division of labour social relationships take on an
independent existence, there appears a division within the life of each individual,
insofar as it is personal and insofar as it is determined by some branch of labour and
the conditions pertaining to it. (We do not mean it to be understood from this that, for
example, the rentier , the capitalist, etc. cease to be persons; but their personality is
conditioned and determined by quite definite class relationships, and the division
appears only in their opposition to another class and, for themselves, only when they
go bankrupt.) In the estate (and even more in the tribe) this is as yet concealed: for
instance, a nobleman always remains  a nobleman, a commoner always a commoner ,
apart from  his other relationships, a quality inseparable from his individuality . The
53division between the personal and the class individual, the accidental nature of the
conditions of life for the individual, appears only with the emer gence of the class,
which is itself a product of the bourgeoisie. This accidental character is only
engendered and developed by comp etition and the struggle of individu als among