human development. A man who has no free time to dispose of, whose whole lifetime,
apart from the mere physical interruptions by sleep, meals, and so forth, is absorbed
by his labour for the capitalist, is less than a beast of burden. He is a mere machine for
producing Foreign Wealth, broken in body and brutalized in mind. Yet the whole
history of modern industry shows that capital, if not checked, will recklessly and
ruthlessly work to cast down the whole working class to this utmost state of
degradation.
In prolonging the working day the capitalist may pay higher wages  and still lower the
value of labor , if the rise of wages does not correspond to the greater amount of
labour extracted, and the quicker decay of the labouring power thus caused. This may
be done in another way. Your middle-class statisticians will tell you, for instance, that
the average wages of factory families in Lancashire has risen. They forget that instead
of the labour of the man, the head of the family , his wife and perhaps three or four
children are now thrown under the Juggernaut wheels of capital, and that the rise of
the aggregate wages does not correspond to the aggregate surplus labour extracted
from the family .
Even with given limits of the working day, such as they now exist in all branches of
industry subjected to the factory laws, a rise of wages may become necess ary, if only
to keep up the old standard value of labour . By incre asing the intensity  of labour , a
man may be made  to expend as much vital force in one hour as he form erly did in
two. This has, to a certain degree, been effected in the trades, placed under the Factory
Acts, by the acceleration of machinery , and the greater number of working  machines
which a single individual has now to superintend. If the increase in the intensity of
152labour or the mass of labour spent in an hour keeps some fair propor tion to the
decrease in the extent of the working day, the working man will still be the winner . If
this limit is overshot, he loses in one form what he has gained in another , and ten
hours of labour may then become as ruinous as twelve hours were before. In checking
this tendency of capital, by struggling  for a rise of wages corresponding to the rising
intensity of labour , the working man only resists the depreciation of his labour and the
deterioration of his race.
4. All of you know that, from reaso ns I have not now to explain, capitalistic
production moves through certain periodical cycles. It moves through a state of
quiescence, growing animation, prosperity , overtrade, crisis, and stagnation. The
market prices of commodities, and the market rates of profit, follow these phases, now
sinking below their averages, now rising above them.
Considering the whole cycle, you will find that one deviation of the market price is
being compensated by the other , and that, taking the average of the cycle, the market
prices of commodities are regulated by their values. Well! During the phases of
sinking market prices and the phases of crisis and stagnation, the working man, if not
thrown out of employment altogether , is sure to have his wages lowered.  Not to be
defrauded, he must, even with such a fall of market prices, debate with the capitalist
in what proportion al degree a fall of wages has become necessary . If, during the
phases of prosperity , when extra profits are made, he did not battle for a rise of wages,
he would, taking the average of one industrial cycle, not even receive his average
wages , or the value  of his labour. It is the utmost height of folly to demand, that while
his wages are necessarily affected by the adverse phases of the cycle, he should
exclude himself from compensation  during the prosperous phases of the cycle.
Generally , the values  of all commodities  are only realized by the compensation of the
continuously chang ing market prices, springing from the continuous fluctuations of
demand and supply . On the basis of the present system labour is only a commodity
like other s. It must, therefore, pass through the same fluctuations to fetch an average
price corresponding to its value.
It would be absurd to treat it on the one hand as a commodity , and to want on the
other hand to exem pt it from the laws which regulate the prices of commo dities. The
slave receives a permanent and fixed amount of maintenance; the wage-lab ourer does
not. He must try to get a rise of wages in the one instance, if only to compe nsate for a
fall of wages in the other . If he resigned himself to accept the will, the dictates of the
capitalist as a perm anent economical  law, he would share in all the miseries of the
slave, without the security of the slave.
5. In all the cases I have considered, and they form ninety-nine out of a hundred, you
have seen that a struggle for a rise of wages follows only in the track of previous
changes, and is the necessary offspring of previous changes in the amount of
production, the productive powers of labour , the value of labour , the value  of money ,
the extent or the intensity of labour extracted, the fluctuations of market prices,
dependent upon the fluctuations of demand and supply , and consistent with the
different phases of the industrial cycle ; in one word, as reactions of labour against the
previous action of capital. By treating the struggle for a rise of wages independently
153of all these circu mstances, by looking only upon the change of wages, and
overlooking all other changes from which they emanate, you proceed from a false
premise in order to arrive at false conclusions.
XIV. The Str uggle Betw een  Capital and Labour and its Results
1. Having shown that the periodical resistance on the part of the working men against
a reduction of wages, and their periodical attempts at getting a rise of wages, are
inseparable from the wages system, and dictated by the very fact of labour being
assimilated to commodities, and therefore subject to the laws, regulating the general
movement of prices; having furtherm ore, shown that a general rise of wages would
result in a fall in the general rate of profit, but not affect the average prices of
commodities, or their values, the question now ultimately arises, how far, in this
incessant struggle between capital and labour , the latter is likely to prove successful.
I might answer by a generalization, and say that, as with all other commodities, so
with labour , its market price  will, in the long run, adapt itself to its value ; that,
therefore, despite all the ups and downs, and do what he may, the working man will,
on an average, only receive the value  of his labour , which resolves into the value of
his labour ing powe r, which is determined by the value of the necessaries required for
its mainte nance and reproduction, which value of necessaries finally is regulated by
the quantity of labour wanted to produce them.
But there  are some peculiar features which distinguish the value of the labouring
power , or the value  of labour , from the values of all other commodities. The value of
the labou ring powe r is formed by two elements -- the one merely physical, the other
historical or social. Its ultimate limit is determined by the physical  element, that is to
say, to maintain and reproduce itself, to perpetuate its physical existence, the working
class must receive the necessaries absolutely indispensable for living and multiplying.
The value  of those indispensable necessaries forms, therefore, the ultimate limit of the
value of labour . On the other hand, the length of the working day is also limited by
ultimate, although very elastic bound aries. Its ultimate limit is given by the physical
force of the labouring man. If the daily exhaustion of his vital forces exceeds a certain
degree, it cannot be exerted anew , day by day .
However , as I said, this limit is very elastic. A quick succession of unhealthy and
short-lived generations will keep the labour market as well supplied as a series of
vigorous and long-lived generations. Besides this mere physical element, the value of
labour is in every country determined  by a traditional standar d of life. It is not mere
physical life, but it is the satisfaction of certain wants springing from the social
conditions in which people are placed  and reared up. The English standard of life may
be reduced to the Irish standard; the standard of life of a German peasant to that of a
Livonian peasant. The important part which historical tradition and social habitude
play in this respect, you may learn from Mr. Thornton's work on over-population ,
where he shows that the average wages in different agricultural districts of England
still nowadays differ more or less according to the more or less favourable
circumstances under which the districts have emer ged from the state of serfdom.
This historical or social element, entering into the value of labour , may be expanded,
or contracted, or altogether extingui shed, so that nothing remains but the physical
154limit. During the time of the anti-Jacobin war, undertaken, as the incorrigible tax eater
and sinec urist, old Geor ge Rose, used to say, to save the comforts of our holy religion
from the inroads of the French infidels, the honest English farmers, so tenderly
handled in a former chapter of ours, depressed the wages of the agricultural labourers
even beneath that mere physical minimum , but made up by Poor Laws the remainder
necessary for the physical perpetuation of the race. This was a glorious way to convert
the wages labourer into a slave, and Shakespeare's proud yeoman into a pauper .
By comparing the standard wages or values of labour in different countries, and by
comparing them in different historica l epochs of the same country , you will find that
the value of labour  itself is not a fixed but a variable magnitude, even supposing the
values of all other commodities to remain constant.