exploiting labor , into mere instruments of free and associated labor . But this is
communism, “imp ossible” communism! Why , those member of the ruling classes
who are intelligent enough to perceive the impossibility of continuing the present
system – and they are many – have become the obtrusive and full-mouthed apostles of
co-operative produ ction. If co-operative production is not to remain a sham and a
snare; if it is to supersede the capitalist system; if united co-operative societies are to
regulate national production upon common plan, thus taking it under their own
control, and putting  an end to the constant anarchy and periodical convulsions which
are the fatality of capitalist production – what else, gentlemen, would it be but
communism, “possible” communism?
The work ing class did not expect miracles from the Commune. They have no ready-
made utopias to introduce par decret du peup le. They know that in order to work out
their own emancipation, and along with it that higher form to which present society is
irresistibly tending by its own economical agencies, they will have to pass through
long struggles, through a series of historic processes, transforming circums tances and
men. They have no ideals to realize, but to set free the elements of the new society
with which old collapsing bourgeois society itself is pregnant. In the full
consciousness of their historic mission, and with the heroic resolve to act up to it, the
working class can afford to smile at the coarse invective of the gentlemen’ s gentlemen
with pen and inkhorn, and at the didactic patronage of well-wishing bourgeois-
doctrinaires, pouri ng forth their ignorant platitudes and sectarian crotchets in the
oracular tone of scientific infallibility .
When the Paris Commune took the management of the revolution in its own hands;
when plain working men for the first time dared to infringe upon the governmental
privilege of their “natural superior s,” and, under circumstances of unexampled
difficulty , performed it at salaries the highest of which barely amounted to one-fifth
what, according to high scientific authority, is the minimum required for a secretary to
a certain metropolitan school-board – the old world writhed in convulsions of rage at
the sight of the Red Flag, the symbol of the Republic of Labor , floating over the Hotel
de Ville.
And yet, this was the first revolut ion in which the working class was openly
acknowledged as the only class capab le of social initiative, even by the great bulk of
the Paris bourgeois – shopkeepers, tradesmen, merchants – the wealthy capitalist
alone excepted. The Commune had saved them by a sagacious settlement of that ever
recurring cause of dispute among the bourgeois themselves – the debtor and creditor
accounts. The same portion of the bourgeois, after they had assisted in putting down
the worki ng men’ s insurrection of June 1848, had been at once uncere moniously
91sacrificed to their creditors by the then Constituent Assembly . But this was not their
only motive for now rallying around  the working class. They felt there was but one
alternative – the Commune, or the empire – under whatever name it might reappear .
The empire had ruined them economically by the havoc it made of public wealth, by
the wholesale financial swindling it fostered, by the props it lent to the artificially
accelerated centralization of capital, and the concomitant expropriation of their own
ranks. It had suppressed them politica lly, it had shocked them morally by its orgies, it
had insult ed their Voltairianism by handing over the education of their children to the
fréres Ignorantins , it had revolted their national feeling as Frenchmen by precipitating
them headlong into a war which left only one equivalent for the ruins it made – the
disappearance of the empire. In fact, after the exodus from Paris of the high
Bonapartist and capitalist bohème , the true bourgeois Party of Order came out in the
shape of the “Uni on Republicaine,”  enrolling themselves under the colors of the
Commune and defending it against the wilful misconstructions of Thiers. Whether the
gratitude of this great body of the bourgeois will stand the present severe  trial, time
must show .
The Commune was perfectly right in telling the peasants that “its victory was their
only hope.” Of all the lies hatched at Versailles and re-echoed by the glorious
European penny-a- liner, one of the most tremendous was that the Rurals represented
the Frenc h peasantry . Think only of the love of the French peasant for the men to
whom, after 1815,  he had to pay the milliard indemnity . In the eyes of the French
peasant, the very existence of a great landed proprietor is in itself an encroachment on
his conquests of 1789. The bourgeois, in 1848, had burdened his plot of land with the
additional tax of 45 cents, in the franc; but then he did so in the name of the
revolution; while now he had foment ed a civil war against revolution, to shift on to
the peasant’ s shoulders the chief load of the 5 milliards of indemnity to be paid to the
Prussian. The Commune, on the other  hand, in one of its first proclamation s, declared
that the true originators of the war would be made to pay its cost. The Commune
would have delivered the peasant of the blood tax – would have given him a cheap
government – transformed his present blood-suckers, the notary , advocate, executor ,
and other judicial vampires, into salaried communal agents, elected  by, and
responsible to, himself. It would have freed him of the tyranny of the garde
champêtr e, the gendarme, and the prefect; would have put enlightenment by the
schoolmaster in the place of stultific ation by the priest. And the French peasant is,
above all, a man of reckoning. He would find it extremely reasonable that the pay of
the priest, instead of being extorted by the tax-gatherer , should only depend upon the
spontaneous action of the parishioners’  religious instinct. Such were the great
immediate boons which the rule of the Commune – and that rule alone – held out to
the Frenc h peasan try. It is, therefore , quite superfluous here to expatiate  upon the
more complicated but vital problems which the Commune alone was able, and at the
same time compell ed, to solve in favor of the peasant – viz., the hypoth ecary debt,
lying like an incubus upon his parcel of soil, the prolétariat foncier  (the rural
proletariat), daily growing upon it, and his expropriation from it enforced, at a more
and more rapid rate, by the very development of modern agricultur e and the
competition of capitalist farming.
92The French peasan t had elected Louis Bonaparte president of the republ ic; but the
Party of Order created the empire. What the French peasant really wants he
commenced to show in 1849 and 1850, by opposing his maire to the government’ s
prefect, his school- master to the gove rnment’ s priest, and himself to the government’ s
gendarme. All the laws made by the Party of Order in January and February 1850
were avowed measures of repression against the peasant. The peasant was a
Bonapartist, because the Great Revolution, with all its benefits to him, was, in his
eyes, personified in Napoleon. This delusion, rapidly breaking down under the Second
Empire (and in its very nature hostile to the Rurals), this prejudice of the past, how
could it have withs tood the appeal of the Commune to the living interests and urgent
wants of the peasantry?
The Rurals – this was, in fact, their chief apprehension – knew that three months’  free
communication of Communal Paris with the provinces would bring about a general
rising of the peasants, and hence their anxiety to establish a police blocka de around
Paris, so as to stop the spread of the rinderpest [cattle pest – contagious disease] .
If the Commune was thus the true representative of all the healthy elements  of French
society , and theref ore the truly national government, it was, at the same  time, as a
working men’ s government, as the bold champion of the emancipation of labor ,
emphatically international. Within sight of that Prussian army , that had annexed to
Germany two French provinces, the Commune annexed to France the work ing people
all over the world.
The Seco nd Empir e had been the jubilee of cosmopolitan blackleggism, the rakes of
all countries rushing in at its call for a share in its orgies and in the plunder of the
French people. Even at this moment, the right hand of Thiers is Ganessco, the foul
Wallachian, and his left hand is Mark ovsky , the Russian spy. The Commun e admitted
all foreign ers to the honor of dying for an immortal cause. Between the foreign war
lost by their treason, and the civil war fomented by their conspiracy with the foreign
invader , the bourgeoisie had found the time to display their patriotism by organizing
police hunts upon the Germans in France. The Commune made a German working
man [Leo Frankel] its Minister of Labor . Thiers, the bourgeoisie, the Second Empire,
had continually deluded Poland by loud professions of sympathy , while  in reality
betraying her to, and doing the dirty work of, Russia. The Commune honoured the
heroic sons of Poland [J. Dabrowski and W. Wróblewski]  by placing them at the head
of the defenders of Paris. And, to broadly mark the new era of history it was conscious
of initiati ng, unde r the eyes of the conquering Prussians on one side, and the
Bonapartist army , led by Bonapartis t generals, on the other , the Commune pulled
down that colossal symbol of martial glory , the Vendôme Column.
The great social measure of the Commune was its own working existence.  Its special
measures could but betoken the tenden cy of a government of the people by the people.
Such were  the abolition of the nightw ork of journeymen bakers; the prohibi tion, under
penalty , of the employers’  practice to reduce wages by levying upon their workpeople
fines under manifold pretexts – a process in which the employer combines in his own