Money or simple circulation; 3. Capital in general. The present part consists of the
first two chapters.  The entire materi al lies before me in the form of monographs,
which were written not for publication but for self-clarification at widely separated
periods; their remoulding into an integrated whole according to the plan I have
indicated will depend upon circumstances.
A general introduction, which I had drafted, is omitted, since on further consideration
it seems to me confusing to anticipate results which still have to be substantiated, and
the reader who really wishes to follow me will have to decide to advance from the
particular to the general. A few brief remarks regarding the course of my study of
political economy are appropriate here.
Although I studied jurisprudence, I pursued it as a subject subordinated to philosophy
and history . In the year 1842-43, as editor of the Rheinische Zeitung, I first found
myself in the emba rrassing position of having to discuss what is known as material
interests. The deliberations of the Rhenish Landtag on forest thefts and the division of
landed property; the official polemic started by Herr von Schaper , then Oberpräsident
of the Rhine Province, against the Rheinische Zeitung about the condition of the
Moselle peasantry , and finally the debates on free trade and protective tariffs caused
me in the first instance to turn my attention to economic questions. On the other hand,
at that time when good intentions “to push forward” often took the place of factual
knowledge, an echo of French socialism and communism, slightly tinged by
philosophy , was noticeable in the Rheinische Zeitung. I objected to this dilettantism,
but at the same time frankly admitted in a controversy with the Allgemeine
Augsbur ger Zeitung that my previous studies did not allow me to express any opinion
on the content of the French theories. When the publishers of the Rheinisc he Zeitung
conceived the illusion that by a more compliant policy on the part of the paper it
might be possible to secure the abrogation of the death sentence passed  upon it, I
eagerly grasped the opportunity to withdraw from the public stage to my study .
The first work which I undertook to dispel the doubts assailing me was a critical re-
examination of the Hegelian philosop hy of law; the introduction to this work being
published in the Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher  issued in Paris in 1844. My
inquiry led me to the conclusion that neither legal relations nor political forms could
be comprehended whether by themselves or on the basis of a so-called general
158development of the human mind, but that on the contrary they originate in the material
conditions of life, the totality of whic h Hegel, following the example of English and
French thinkers of the eighteenth century , embraces within the term “civil society”;
that the anatomy of this civil society , however , has to be sought in political economy .
The study of this, which I began in Paris, I continued in Brussels, wher e I moved
owing to an expuls ion order issued by M. Guizot. The general conclusion at which I
arrived and which, once reached, became the guiding principle of my studies can be
summarised as follows.
In the social produ ction of their existe nce, men inevitably enter into definit e relations,
which are indepen dent of their will, namely relations of production appro priate to a
given stage in the development of their material forces of production. The totality of
these relations of production constitutes the economic structure of society , the real
foundation, on which arises a legal and political superstructure and to which
correspond definit e forms of social consciousness. The mode of production of
material life conditions the general process of social, political and intellectu al life. It is
not the consciousness of men that determines their existence, but their social existence
that determines their consciousness. At a certain stage of development, the material
productive forces of society come into conflict with the existing relations of
production or - this merely expresses the same thing in legal terms - with the property
relations within the framework of which they have operated hitherto. From forms of
development of the productive forces these relations turn into their fetters. Then
begins an era of social revolution. The changes in the economic found ation lead
sooner or later to the transformation of the whole immense superstructure.
In studying such transformations it is always necessary to distinguish between the
material transformation of the economic conditions of production, which can be
determined with the precision of natural science, and the legal, political , religious,
artistic or philosophic - in short, ideological forms in which men become conscious of
this conflict and fight it out. Just as one does not judge an individual by what he
thinks about hims elf, so one cannot judge such a period of transformation by its
consciousness, but, on the contrary , this consciousness must be explained from the
contradictions of material life, from the conflict existing between the social forces of
production and the relations of production. No social order is ever destroyed  before all
the produ ctive forces for which it is sufficient have been developed, and new superior
relations of production never replace older ones before the material conditions for
their existence have matured within the framework of the old society .
Mankind thus inevitably sets itself only such tasks as it is able to solve, since closer
examination will always show that the problem itself arises only when the material
conditions for its solution are already  present or at least in the course of formation. In
broad outline, the Asiatic, ancient, feudal and modern bourgeois modes of production
may be designated as epochs mark ing progress in the economic devel opment of
society . The bourgeois mode of production is the last antagonistic form of the social
process of production - antagonistic not in the sense of individual antagon ism but of
an antagonism that emanates from the individuals' social conditions of existence - but
the productive forces developing within bourgeois society create also the material
159conditions for a solution of this antagonism. The prehistory of human society
accordingly closes with this social formation.
 
160Capital, Volume I (1867)
From the Pr eface
Every beginning is difficult, holds in all sciences. To understand the first chapter ,
especially the section that contains the analysis of commodities, will, therefore,
present the greatest  difficulty . That which concerns more especially the analysis of the
substance of value and the magnitude of value, I have, as much as it was possible,
popularised. The value-form, whose fully developed shape is the money-fo rm, is very
elementary and simple. Nevertheless, the human mind has for more than 2,000 years
sought in vain to get to the bottom of it all, whilst on the other hand, to the successful
analysis of much more composite and complex forms, there has been at least an
approximation. Why? Because the body , as an organic whole, is more easy of study
than are the cells of that body . In the analysis of economic forms, moreov er, neither
microscopes nor chemical reagents are of use. The force of abstraction must replace
both. But in bourgeois society , the commodity-form of the product of labour – or
value-form of the commodity – is the economic cell-form. To the superficial observer ,
the analy sis of these forms seems to turn upon minutiae. It does in fact deal with
minutiae, but they are of the same order as those dealt with in microscopic anatomy .
Chapter 1
§1 The Two Facto rs of a Commodity:  Use-Value and Value
The wealth of those societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails,
presents itself as “an immense accumulation of commodities,” its unit being a single
commodity . Our investigation must therefore begin with the analysis of a commodity .
A commodity is, in the first place, an object outside us, a thing that by its properties
satisfies human wants of some sort or another . The nature of such wants, whether , for
instance, they spring from the stomach or from fancy , makes no difference. Neither
are we here concerned to know how the object satisfies these wants, whether directly
as means of subsistence, or indirectly as means of production.
Every useful thing, as iron, paper , &c., may be looked at from the two points of view
of quality and quantity . It is an assemblage of many properties, and may therefore be
of use in various ways. To discover the various uses of things is the work of history .
So also is the establishment of socially-recognized standards of measure for the
quantities of these useful objects. The diversity of these measures has its origin partly
in the diverse nature of the objects to be measured, partly in convention.
The utility of a thing makes it a use value. But this utility is not a thing of air. Being
limited by the physical properties of the commodity , it has no existence apart from
that commodity . A commodity , such as iron, corn, or a diamond, is therefore, so far as
it is a material thing, a use value, something useful. This property of a commodity is
independent of the amount of labour required to appropriate its useful qualities. When
161treating of use value, we always assum e to be dealing with definite quantities, such as
dozens of watches, yards of linen, or tons of iron. The use values of commodities
furnish the material for a special study , that of the commercial knowledge of
commodities. Use values become a reality only by use or consumption: they also
constitute the substance of all wealth, whatever may be the social form of that wealth.
In the form of society we are about  to consider , they are, in addition, the material
depositories of exchange value.