matter of course its own cave or hut like the separate family tent of the nomads.
This separate domestic economy is made only the more necessary by the further
development of private property . With the agricultural peoples a communal
domestic economy is just as impossible as a communal cultivation of the soil. A
great advance was the building of towns. In all previous periods, however , the
abolition of individual economy , which is inseparable from the abolition of
private property , was impossible for the simple reason that the material
conditions governing it were not present. The setting-up of a communal
domestic economy presupposes the development of machinery , of the use of
natural forces and of many other productive forces - e.g. of water -supplies, of
gas-lighting, steam-heating, etc., the removal [of the antagonism] of town and
country . Without these conditions a communal economy would not in itself form
a new productive force; lacking any material basis and resting on a purely
theoretical foundation, it would be a mere freak and would end in nothing more
than a monastic economy - What was possible can be seen in the towns brought
about by condensation and the erection of communal buildings for various
25definite purposes (prisons, barracks, etc.). That the abolition of individual
economy is inseparable from the abolition of the family is self-evident.]
These three aspect s of social activity  are not of course to be taken as three different
stages, but just as three aspects or, to make it clear to the Germans, three ‘moments,’
which have existed simultaneously since the dawn of history and the first men, and
which still assert themselves in history today .
The production of life, both of one’s own in labour and of fresh life in procreation,
now appears as a double relationship: on the one hand as a natural, on the other as a
social relationship. By social we understand the co-operation of several individuals,
no matter  under what conditions, in what manner and to what end. It follow s from this
that a certain mode of production, or industrial stage, is always combin ed with a
certain mode of co-operation, or social stage, and this mode of co-operation is itself a
‘productive force.’  Further , that the multitude of productive forces accessible to men
determines the nature of society , hence, that the ‘history of humanity’  must always be
studied and treated in relation to the history of industry and exchange. But it is also
clear how in Germany it is impossible to write this sort of history , because the
Germans lack not only the necessary power of comprehension and the material but
also the ‘evidence  of their senses,’  for across the Rhine you cannot have any
experience of these things since history has stopped happening. Thus it is quite
obvious from the start that there exists a materialistic connection of men with one
another , which is determined by their needs and their mode of production,  and which
is as old as men themselves. This connection is ever taking on new form s, and thus
presents a ‘history’  independently of the existence of any political or religious
nonsense which in addition may hold men together .
Only now, after having considered four moments, four aspects of the primary
historical relationsh ips, do we find that man also possesses ‘consciousness,’  but, even
so, not inherent, not ‘pure’  consciousness. From the start the ‘spirit’  is afflicted with
the curse of being  ‘burdened’  with matter, which here makes its appearance in the
form of agitated layers of air, sound s, in short, of language. Language is as old as
consciousness, language is practical consciousness that exists also for other men,
[Marx struck out: ‘Mein Verhältnis zu meiner Umgebung ist mein Bewußt sein,’  i.e.,
‘My relation to my environment is my consciousness.’]  and for that reaso n alone it
really exists for me personally as well; language, like consciousness, only arises from
the need, the necessity , of intercourse with other men. Where there exists a
relationship, it exists for me: the anim al does not enter into ‘relations’  with anything,
it does not enter into any relation at all. For the animal, its relation to others does not
exist as a relation . Consciou sness is, therefore, from the very beginning a social
product, and remains so as long as men exist at all. Consciousness is at first, of
course, merely consciousness concerning the immediate sensuous environment and
consciousness of the limited connection with other persons and things outside the
individual who is growing self-cons cious. At the same time it is consci ousness of
nature, which first appears to men as a completely alien, all-powerful and unassailable
force, with which men’s relations are purely animal and by which they are overawed
like beast s; it is thus a purely anima l consciousness of nature (natural religion) just
because nature is as yet hardly modif ied historically . (We see here immed iately: this
26natural religion or this particular relation of men to nature is determined by the form
of society and vice versa. Here, as everywhere, the identity of nature and man appears
in such a way that the restricted relation of men to nature determines their restricted
relation to one another , and their restricted relation to one another determines men’ s
restricted relation to nature.) On the other hand, man’ s consciousness of the necessity
of associating with the individuals around him is the beginning of the consciousness
that he is living in society at all. This beginning is as animal as social life itself at this
stage. It is mere herd-consciousness, and at this point man is only distinguished from
sheep by the fact that with him consciousness takes the place of instinct or that his
instinct is a conscious one. This sheep-like or tribal consciousness receives its further
development and extension through increased productivity , the increase of needs, and,
what is fundamental to both of these, the increase of population. With these there
develops the division of labour , which was originally nothing but the division of
labour in the sexual act, then that division of labour which develops spontaneously or
‘naturally’  by virtue of natural predisposition (e.g. physical strength), needs,
accidents, etc. etc. Division of labour only becomes truly such from the moment when
a division of mate rial and mental labour appears. (The first form of ideologists,
priests, is concurrent.) From this moment onwards consciousness can really flatter
itself that it is something other than consciousness of existing practice, that it really
represents something without representing something real; from now on
consciousness is in a position to emancipate itself from the world and to proceed to
the formation of ‘pure’  theory , theology , philosophy , ethics, etc. But even if this
theory , theology , philosophy , ethics, etc. comes into contradiction with the existing
relations, this can only occur because existing social relations have come into
contradiction with existing forces of production; this, moreover , can also occur in a
particular national sphere of relations through the appearance of the contradiction, not
within the national  orbit, but between  this national consciousness and the practice of
other nations, i.e. between the national and the general consciousness of a nation (as
we see it now in Germany).
Moreover , it is quite immaterial what  consciousness starts to do on its own: out of all
such muck we get only the one inference that these three moments, the forces of
production, the state of society , and consciousness, can and must come into
contradiction with one another , because the division of labour implies the possibility ,
nay the fact that intellectual and material activity - enjoyment and labour , production
and consu mption - devolve on different individuals, and that the only possibility of
their not coming into contradiction lies in the negation in its turn of the division of
labour . It is self-evident, moreover , that ‘spectres,’  ‘bonds,’  ‘the higher being,’
‘concept,’  ‘scruple ,’ are merely the idealistic, spiritual expression, the conception
apparently of the isolated individual, the image of very empirical fetters and
limitations, within which the mode of production of life and the form of intercourse
coupled with it move.
Private Property and Communism
With the division of labour , in which  all these contradictions are implicit, and which
in its turn is based on the natural division of labour in the family and the separation of
27society into individual families opposed to one another , is given simultaneously the
distribution, and indeed the unequal distribution, both quantitative and qualitative, of
labour and its products, hence property: the nucleus, the first form, of which lies in the
family , where wife and children are the slaves of the husband. This latent slavery in
the family , though still very crude, is the first property , but even at this early stage it
corresponds perfectly to the definition of modern economists who call it the power of
disposing of the labour -power of others. Division of labour and private property are,
moreover , identical  expressions: in the one the same thing is affirmed with reference
to activity as is af firmed in the other with reference to the product of the activity .
[Note by Marx : Further , the division of labour implies the contradiction between
the interest of the separate individual or the individual family and the communal
interest of all individuals who have intercourse with one another . And indeed,
this communal interest does not exist merely in the imagination, as the ‘general
interest,’  but first of all in reality , as the mutual interdependence of the
individuals among whom the labour is divided. And finally , the division of
labour of fers us the first example of how , as long as man remains in natural