Napoleon, the heroes as well as the parties and the masses of the old French
Revolution, perfor med the task of their time - that of unchaining and establishing
modern bourgeois society - in Roma n costumes and with Roman phrases . The first
one destroyed the feudal foundation and cut off the feudal heads that had grown on it.
The other created inside France the only conditions under which free competition
could be developed, parcelled-out land properly used, and the unfettered productive
power of the nation employed; and beyond the French borders it swept away feudal
institutions everywhere, to provide, as far as necessary , bourgeois society  in France
with an appropriate up-to-date enviro nment on the European continent. Once the new
social formation was established, the antediluvian colossi disappeared and with them
also the resurrecte d Romanism - the Brutuses, the Gracchi, the publicolas, the
tribunes, the senators, and Caesar himself. Bour geois society in its sober reality bred
its own true interpreters and spokesmen in the Says, Cousins, Roye r-Collards,
Benjamin Constant s, and Guizots; its real military leaders sat behind the office desk
97and the hog-heade d Louis XVIII was its political chief. Entirely absor bed in the
production of wealth and in peaceful competitive struggle, it no longer remembered
that the ghosts of the Roman period had watched over its cradle.
But unhe roic though bourgeois society is, it nevertheless needed heroism, sacrifice,
terror , civil war, and national wars to bring it into being. And in the auste re classical
traditions of the Roman Republic the bourgeois gladiators found the ideals and the art
forms, the self-deceptions, that they needed to conceal from themselves the bourgeois-
limited content of their struggles and to keep their passion on the high plane of great
historic tragedy . Similarly , at another stage of development a century earlier ,
Cromwell and the English people had borrowed from the Old Testament the speech,
emotions, and illusions for their bourgeois revolution. When the real goal had been
achieved and the bourgeois transformation of English society had been accomplished,
Locke supplanted Habakkuk.
Thus the awakenin g of the dead in those revolutions served the purpose of glorifying
the new struggles, not of parodying  the old; of magnifying the given task in the
imagination, not recoiling from its solution in reality; of finding once more the spirit
of revolution, not making its ghost walk again.
From 1848 to 1851 , only the ghost of the old revolution circulated - from Marrast, the
républicain en gants jaunes , who disguised himself as old Bailly, down to the
adventurer who hides his trivial and repulsive features behind the iron death mask of
Napoleon. A whole nation, which thought it had acquired an accelerated power of
motion by means of a revolution, suddenly finds itself set back into a defunct epoch,
and to remove any doubt about the relapse, the old dates arise again - the old
chronology , the old names, the old edicts, which had long since become a subject of
antiquarian scholarship, and the old minions of the law who had seemed long dead.
The nation feels like the mad Englishman in Bedlam who thinks he is living in the
time of the old Pharaohs and daily bewails the hard labor he must perform in the
Ethiopian gold mines, immured in this subterranean prison, a pale lamp fastened to
his head, the overseer of the slaves behind him with a long whip, and at the exits a
confused welter of barbarian war slaves who understand neither the forced laborers
nor each other , since they speak no common language. “And all this,” sighs the mad
Englishman, “is expected of me, a freeborn Briton, in order to make gold for the
Pharaohs.” “In order to pay the debts of the Bonaparte family ,” sighs the French
nation. The Englishman, so long as he was not in his right mind, could not get rid of
his idée fixé of mining  gold. The French, so long as they were engaged in revolution,
could not get rid of the memory of Napoleon, as the election of December  10 [1848,
when Louis Bonaparte was elected President of the French Republic by plebiscite.]
was proved. They longed to return from the perils of revolution to the fleshpots of
Egypt, and December 2, 1851 [The date of the coup d’état by Louis  Bonaparte] , was
the answe r. Now they have not only a caricature of the old Napoleon, but the old
Napoleon himself, caricatured as he would have to be in the middle of the nineteenth
century .
The socia l revolutio n of the nineteenth century cannot take its poetry from the past but
only from  the future. It cannot begin with itself before it has stripped away all
98superstition about the past. The former revolutions required recollections of past
world history in order to smother their own content. The revolution of the nineteenth
century must let the dead bury their dead in order to arrive at its own content. There
the phrase went beyond the content - here the content goes beyond the phrase.
The February Revolution was a surprise attack, a seizing of the old society unaware,
and the people proclaimed this unexpected stroke a deed of world importance,
ushering in a new epoch. On December 2 the February Revolution is conjured away
as a cardsharp’ s trick, and what seem s overthrown is no longer the monarchy but the
liberal concessions that had been wrung from it through centuries of struggle. Instead
of society having conquered a new content for itself, it seems that the state has only
returned to its oldest form, to a shamelessly simple rule by the sword and the monk’ s
cowl. This is the answer to the coup de main  of February , 1848, given by the coup de
téte of Decem ber, 1851. Easy come, easy go. Meantime, the interval did not pass
unused. During 1848-51 French society , by an abbreviated revolutionary method,
caught up with the studies and exper iences which in a regular , so to speak, textbook
course of development would have preceded the February Revolution, if the latter
were to be more than a mere ruffling of the surface. Society seems now to have
retreated to behind its starting point; in truth, it has first to create for itself the
revolutionary point of departure - the situation, the relations, the conditions under
which alone modern revolution becomes serious.
Bour geois revoluti ons, like those of the eighteenth century , storm more swiftly from
success to success,  their dramatic effects outdo each other , men and things seem set in
sparkling diamonds, ecstasy is the order of the day - but they are short-lived, soon
they have reached their zenith, and a long Katzenjammer takes hold of society before
it learns to assimilate the results of its storm-and-stress period soberly . On the other
hand, proletarian revolutions, like those of the nineteenth century , constantly criticize
themselves, constantly interrupt themselves in their own course, return to the
apparently accomplished, in order to begin anew; they deride with cruel thoroughness
the half-measures, weaknesses, and paltriness of their first attempts, seem to throw
down their opponen ts only so the latter may draw new strength from the earth and rise
before them again more gigantic than ever, recoil constantly from the indefinite
colossalness of their own goals - until a situation is created which makes all turning
back impossible, and the conditions themselves call out:
Hic Rhodus, hic salta!
[Here is the rose, here dance!]
For the rest, every  fair observer , even if he had not followed the course of French
developments step by step, must have had a presentiment of the imminence of an
unheard-of disgrace for the revolution. It was enough to hear the complacent yelps of
victory with which the democrats congratulated each other on the expectedly gracious
consequences of the second Sunday in May, 1852. [day of elections - Louis
Bonaparte’ s term was expired]  In their minds that second Sunday of May had become
a certain idea, a dogma, like the day of Christ’ s reappearance and the beginning of the
millennium in the minds of the Chilia sts. As always, weakness had taken refuge in a
belief in miracles, believed the enem y to be overcome when he was only conjured
99away in imagination, and lost all understanding of the present in an inactive
glorification of the future that was in store for it and the deeds it had in mind but did
not want to carry out yet. Those heroes who seek to disprove their demonstrated
incapacity - by offering each other their sympathy and getting together in a crowd -
had tied up their bundles, collected their laurel wreaths in advance, and occupied
themselves with discounting on the exchange market the republics in partibus  for
which they had already providently organized the government personnel with all the
calm of their unassuming disposition. December 2 struck them like a thunderbolt from
a clear sky, and those who in periods of petty depression gladly let their inner fears be
drowned by the loudest renters will perhaps have convinced themselves that the times
are past when the cackle of geese could save the Capitol.
The constitution, the National Assembly , the dynastic parties, the blue and red
republicans, the heroes of Africa, the thunder from the platform, the sheet lightning of
the daily press, the entire literatu re, the political names and the intellectual
reputations, the civil law and the penal code, liberté, egalité, fraternité , and the
second Sunday in May, 1852 - all have vanished like a phantasmagoria before the
spell of a man whom even his enemies do not make out to be a sorcerer . Universal
suffrage seems to have survived only for the moment, so that with its own hand it may
make its last will and testament before the eyes of all the world and declare in the
name of the people itself: “All that exists deserves to perish.”
It is not enough to say, as the French do, that their nation was taken unawares. Nations