the conditions of labour , of tools and materials, and thus the splitting-up of
accumulated capita l among different owners, and thus, also, the divisio n between
capital and labour , and the different forms of property itself. The more the division of
labour develops and accumulation grows, the sharper are the forms that this process of
differentiation assumes. Labour itself can only exist on the premise of this
fragmentation.
59Thus two facts are here revealed. First the productive forces appear as a world for
themselves, quite independent of and divorced from the individuals, alongside the
individuals: the reason for this is that the individuals, whose forces they are, exist split
up and in oppositio n to one another , whilst, on the other hand, these forces are only
real forces in the intercourse and association of these individuals. Thus, on the one
hand, we have a totality of productive forces, which have, as it were, taken on a
material form and are for the individu als no longer the forces of the individuals but of
private property , and hence of the individuals only insofar as they are owners of
private property themselves. Never , in any earlier period, have the productive forces
taken on a form so indifferent to the intercourse of individuals as individuals, because
their intercourse itself was formerly a restricted one. On the other hand, standing over
against these produ ctive forces, we have the majority of the individuals from whom
these forces have been wrested away , and who, robbed thus of all real life-content,
have beco me abstr act individuals, but who are, however , only by this fact put into a
position to enter into relation with one another as individuals .
The only connection which still links them with the productive forces and with their
own exist ence - labour - has lost all semblance of self-activity and only sustains their
life by stunting it. While in the earlier periods self-activity and the production of
material life were separated, in that they devolved on different persons, and while, on
account of the narrowness of the individuals themselves, the production of material
life was considered as a subordinate mode of self-activity , they now diver ge to such
an extent that altogether material life appears as the end, and what produces this
material life, labou r (which is now the only possible but, as we see, negative form of
self-activity), as the means.
[10. The Necessity, Preconditions and Consequences of the
Abolition of Private Property]
Thus things have now come to such a pass that the individuals must appropriate the
existing totality of productive forces, not only to achieve self-activity , but, also,
merely to safeguard their very existence. This appropriation is first determined by the
object to be appropriated, the productive forces, which have been developed to a
totality and which only exist within a universal intercourse. From this aspect alone,
therefore, this appropriation must have a universal character corresponding to the
productive forces and the intercourse.
The appropriation of these forces is itself nothing more than the development of the
individual capacities corresponding to the material instruments of production. The
appropriation of a totality of instrum ents of production is, for this very reason, the
development of a totality of capacities in the individuals themselves.
This appropriation  is further determined by the persons appropriating. Only the
proletarians of the present day, who are completely shut off from all self-a ctivity , are
in a position to achieve a complete and no longer restricted self-activ ity, which
consists in the appropriation of a totality of productive forces and in the thus
postulated development of a totality of capacities. All earlier revolutionary
appropriations were restricted; individuals, whose self-activity was restricted by a
60crude instrument of production and a limited intercourse, appropriated this crude
instrument of production, and hence merely achieved a new state of limitation. Their
instrument of production became their property , but they themselves remained
subordinate to the division of labour  and their own instrument of production. In all
expropriations up to now, a mass of individuals remained subservient to a single
instrument of production; in the appropriation by the proletarians, a mass of
instruments of production must be made subject to each individual, and property to
all. Modern universal intercourse can be controlled by individuals, therefore, only
when controlled by all.
This appropriation is further determined by the manner in which it must be effected. It
can only be effected through a union , which by the character of the prole tariat itself
can again only be a universal one, and through a revolution, in which, on the one
hand, the power of the earlier mode of production and intercourse and social
organisation is overthrown, and, on the other hand, there develops the universal
character and the energy of the proletariat, without which the revolution cannot be
accomplished; and in which, further , the proletariat rids itself of everything that still
clings to it from its previous position in society .
Only at this stage does self-activity coincide with material life, which corresponds to
the development of individuals into complete individuals and the casting -off of all
natural limitations.  The transformation of labour into self-activity corresponds to the
transformation of the earlier limited intercourse into the intercourse of individuals as
such. With the appropriation of the total productive forces through united individuals,
private property comes to an end. Whilst previously in history a particular condition
always appeared as accidental, now the isolation of individuals and the particular
private gain of each man have themselves become accidental.
The individuals, who are no longer subject to the division of labour , have been
conceived by the philosophers as an ideal, under the name ‘Man’. They have
conceived the whole process which we have outlined as the evolutionary process of
‘Man,’  so that at every historical stage ‘Man’  was substituted for the indiv iduals and
shown as the motive force of history . The whole process was thus conceived as a
process of the self-estrangement of ‘Man,’ and this was essentially due to the fact that
the average individual of the later stage was always foisted on to the earlier stage, and
the consciousness of a later age on to the individuals of an earlier . Through this
inversion, which from the first is an abstract image of the actual conditions, it was
possible to transform the whole of history into an evolutionary process of
consciousness.
The Necessity of the Communist Revolution
Finally , from the conception of history we have sketched we obtain these further
conclusions:
(1) In the development of productive forces there comes a stage when productive
forces and means of intercourse are brought into being, which, under the existing
relationships, only cause mischief, and are no longer productive but destructive forces
(machinery and money); and connected with this a class is called forth, which has to
61bear all the burdens of society witho ut enjoying its advantages, which, ousted from
society , is forced into the most decide d antagonism to all other classes; a class which
forms the majority of all members of society , and from which emanates the
consciousness of the necessity of a fundamental revolution, the communist
consciousness, which may, of course , arise among the other classes too through the
contemplation of the situation of this class.
(2) The conditions under which definite productive forces can be applied are the
conditions of the rule of a definite class of society , whose social power , deriving from
its proper ty, has its practical-idealistic  expression in each case in the form of the State;
and, therefore, every revolutionary struggle is directed against a class, which till then
has been in power . [Mar ginal note by Marx:] The people are interested in maintaining
the present state of production.
(3) In all revolution s up till now the mode of activity always remained unscathed and
it was only a question of a different distribution of this activity , a new distribution of
labour to other persons, whilst the communist revolution is directed against the
preceding mode of activity , does away with labour , and abolishes the rule of all
classes with the classes themselves, because it is carried through by the class which no
longer counts as a class in society , is not recognised as a class, and is in itself the
expression of the dissolution of all classes, nationalities, etc. within present society;
and
(4) Both for the production on a mass scale of this communist consciousne ss, and for
the success of the cause itself, the alteration of men on a mass scale is, necessary , an
alteration which can only take place in a practical movement, a revol ution; this
revolution is necessary , therefore, not only because the ruling class cannot be
overthrown in any other way, but also because the class overthrowing it can only in a
revolution succeed  in ridding itself of all the muck of ages and become fitted to found
society anew .
62The Communi st Manifesto
(February 1848)
A spectre is haunt ing Europe – the spectre of communism. All the powers of old
Europe have entered into a holy alliance to exorcise this spectre: Pope  and Tsar,
Metternich and Guizot, French Radicals and German police-spies.
Where is the party  in opposition that has not been decried as communistic by its
opponents in power? Where is the opposition that has not hurled back the branding
reproach of communism, against the more advanced opposition parties, as well as
against its reactionary adversaries?
Two things result from this fact:
I. Communism is already acknowledged by all European powers to be itself a power .