[4. Most Extensive Division of Labour.
Large-Scale Industry]
The concentration of trade and manufacture in one country , England, developing
irresistibly in the seventeenth centur y, gradually created for this country a relative
world market, and thus a demand for the manufactured products of this country , which
could no longer be met by the industrial productive forces hitherto existing. This
demand, outgrowing the productive forces, was the motive power which, by
producing big industry - the application of elemental forces to industrial ends,
machinery and the most complex division of labour - called into existence the third
period of private ownership since the Middle Ages. There already existed in England
the other pre-conditions of this new phase: freedom of competition inside the nation,
the devel opment of theoretical mechanics, etc. (Indeed, the science of mechanics
perfected by Newton was altogether the most popular science in France and England
in the eighteenth century .) (Free competition inside the nation itself had everywhere to
be conquered by a revolution - 1640 and 1688 in England, 1789 in France.)
Competition soon compelled every country that wished to retain its historical role to
protect its manufactures by renewed customs regulations (the old dutie s were no
longer any good against big industry ) and soon after to introduce big industry under
protective duties. Big industry univer salised competition in spite of these  protective
measures (it is practical free trade; the protective duty is only a palliative,  a measure
of defenc e within free trade), established means of communication and the modern
world market, subordinated trade to itself, transformed all capital into industrial
capital, and thus produced the rapid circulation (development of the financ ial system)
and the centralisation of capital. By universal competition it forced all individuals to
strain their energy to the utmost. It destroyed as far as possible ideology , religion,
morality , etc. and where it could not do this, made them into a palpa ble lie. It
produced world history for the first time, insofar as it made all civilised nations and
every individual member of them dependent for the satisfaction of their wants on the
whole world, thus destroying the former natural exclusiveness of separate  nations. It
made natural science subservient to capital and took from the division of labour the
last semblance of its natural character . It destroyed natural growth in general, as far as
this is possible while labour exists, and resolved all natural relationships into money
relationships. In the place of naturally grown towns it created the modern, large
industrial cities which have sprung up overnight. Wherever it penetrated, it destroyed
the crafts and all earlier stages of industry. It completed the victory of the commercial
48town over the countryside. [Its first premise] was the automatic system. [Its
development] produced a mass of productive forces, for which private [property]
became just as much a fetter as the guild had been for manufacture and the small,
rural workshop for the developing craft. These productive forces received under the
system of private property a one-sided development only, and became for the majority
destructive forces; moreover , a great multitude of such forces could find no
application at all within this syste m. Generally speaking, big industry created
everywhere the same relations between the classes of society , and thus destroyed the
peculiar individuali ty of the various nationalities. And finally , while the bourgeoisie of
each nation still retained separate national interests, big industry created a class,
which in all nations has the same interest and with which nationality is already dead; a
class whic h is really rid of all the old world and at the same time stands pitted against
it. Big industry makes for the worker not only the relation to the capitalist,  but labour
itself, unbearable.
It is evident that big industry does not reach the same level of development in all
districts of a coun try. This does not, however , retard the class movement of the
proletariat, because  the proletarians created by big industry assume leadership of this
movement and carry the whole mass along with them, and because the workers
excluded from big industry are placed  by it in a still worse situation than the workers
in big industry itself. The countries in which big industry is developed act in a similar
manner upon the more or less non-industrial countries, insofar as the latter are swept
by universal commerce into the universal competitive struggle.
These different forms are just so many forms of the organisation of labour , and hence
of property . In each period a unification of the existing productive forces takes place,
insofar as this has been rendered necessary by needs.
The Relation of State and Law to Property
The first form of property , in the ancient world as in the Middle Ages, is tribal
property , determin ed with the Roma ns chiefly by war, with the Germans by the
rearing of cattle. In the case of the ancient peoples, since several tribes live together in
one town, the tribal property appears as State property , and the right of the individual
to it as mere ‘posse ssion’  which, however , like tribal property as a whole, is confined
to landed property only. Real private property began with the ancients, as with modern
nations, with movable property . - (Slavery and community) (dominium ex jure
Quiritum ). In the case of the nations which  grew out of the Middle Ages, tribal
property evolved through various stages - feudal landed property , corporativ e movable
property , capital invested in manufacture - to modern capital, determined by big
industry and unive rsal competition, i.e. pure private property , which has cast off all
semblance of a communal institution and has shut out the State from any influence on
the develo pment of property . To this modern private property corresponds the modern
State, which, purchased gradually by the owners of property by means of taxation, has
fallen entirely into their hands through  the national debt, and its existence has become
wholly dependent on the commercial credit which the owners of property , the
bourgeois, extend to it, as reflected in the rise and fall of State funds on the stock
49exchange. By the mere fact that it is a class and no longer an estate, the bourgeoisie is
forced to organise itself no longer locally , but nationally , and to give a general form to
its mean average interest. Through the emancipation of private property  from the
community , the State has become a separate entity , beside and outside civil society;
but it is nothing more than the form of organisation which the bourgeois necessarily
adopt both for internal and external purposes, for the mutual guarantee of their
property and interests. The independence of the State is only found nowada ys in those
countries where the estates have not yet completely developed into classes, where the
estates, done away with in more advanced countries, still have a part to play, and
where there exists a mixture; countries, that is to say, in which no one section of the
population can achieve dominance over the others. This is the case particularly in
Germany . The most perfect example of the modern State is North America. The
modern French, English and American writers all express the opinion that the State
exists only for the sake of private property , so that this fact has penetrated into the
consciousness of the normal man.
Since the State is the form in which the individuals of a ruling class assert their
common interests, and in which the whole civil society of an epoch is epitomised, it
follows that the State mediates in the formation of all common institutions and that
the institutions receive a political form. Hence the illusion that law is based on the
will, and indeed on the will divorce d from its real basis - on free will. Similarly ,
justice is in its turn reduced to the actual laws.
Civil law develops simultaneously with private property out of the disintegration of
the natural community . With the Romans the development of private property and
civil law had no further industrial and commercial consequences, because their whole
mode of production did not alter . (Usury!)
With modern peoples, where the feudal community was disintegrated by industry and
trade, there began with the rise of private property and civil law a new phase, which
was capable of further developmen t. The very first town which carried on an
extensive maritime  trade in the Middle Ages, Amalfi, also developed maritime law. As
soon as industry and trade developed private property further , first in Italy and later in
other countries, the highly developed Roman civil law was immediately adopted again
and raised, to authority . When later the bourgeoisie had acquired so much power that
the princes took up its interests in order to overthrow the feudal nobility by means of
the bourgeoisie, there began in all countries - in France in the sixteenth century - the
real development of law, which in all countries except England proceeded on the basis
of the Roman Codex. In England, too, Roman legal principles had to be introduced to
further the development of civil law (especially in the case of movable property). (It
must not be for gotten that law has just as little an independent history as religion.)
In civil law the existing property relationships are declared to be the result of the
general will. The jus utend i et abutendi  itself asserts on the one hand the fact that
private property has become entirely independent of the community , and on the other
the illusion that private property itself  is based solely on the private will, the arbitrary
disposal of the thing. In practice, the abuti  has very definite economic limitations for