rents must be paid. But how in his idea are prices formed? First by wages. Then an
additional percenta ge is joined to the price on behalf of the capitalist, and another
additional percenta ge on behalf of the landlord. Suppose the wages of the labour
employed in the production of a commodity to be ten. If the rate of profit was 100 per
cent, to the wages advanced the capitalist would add ten, and if the rate of rent was
also 100 per cent upon the wages, there would be added ten more, and the aggregate
price of the commodity would amou nt to thirty . But such a determination of prices
would be simply their determination by wages. If wages in the above case rose to
twenty , the price of the commodity would rise to sixty , and so forth. Consequently all
the super annuated writers on political economy who propounded the dogma that
wages regulate prices, have tried to prove it by treating profit and rent as mere
additional percenta ges upon wages . None of them were, of course, able to reduce the
limits of those percentages to any economic law. They seem, on the contrary , to think
profits settled by tradition, custom, the will of the capitalist, or by some other equally
arbitrary and inexplicable method. If they assert that they are settled by the
competition between the capitalists, they say nothing. That competition is sure to
equalize the different rates of profit in different trades, or reduce them to one average
level, but it can never determine the level itself, or the general rate of profit.
What do we mean  by saying that the prices of the commodities are determined by
wages? Wages being but a name for the price of labour , we mean that the prices of
commodities are regulated by the price of labour . As "price" is exchangeable value -
135and in speaking of value I speak always of exchangeable value - is exchangeable
value expressed in money , the proposition comes to this, that "the value of
commodities  is determined by the value of labour ," or that "the value of labour is the
general measur e of value ."
But how, then, is the "value of labour " itself determined? Here we come to a
standstill. Of course, to a standstill if we try reasoning logically . Yet the propounders
of that doctrine make short work of logical scruples. Take our friend Weston, for
example. First he told us that wage s regulate the price of commodities and that
consequently when  wages rise prices must rise. Then he turned round to show us that
a rise of wages will be no good because the prices of commodities had risen, and
because wages were indeed measured by the prices of the commodities upon which
they are spent. Thus we begin by saying that the value of labour determines the value
of commodities, and we wind up by saying that the value of commodities determines
the value of labour . Thus we move to and fro in the most vicious circle, and arrive at
no conclusion at all.
On the whole, it is evident that by making the value of one commodity , say labour ,
corn, or any other commodity , the general measure and regulator of value, we only
shift the difficulty , since we determine one value by another , which on its side wants
to be determined.
The dogm a that "wages determine the price of commodities," expressed in its most
abstract terms, comes to this, that "value is determined by value," and this tautology
means that, in fact, we know nothing at all about value. Accepting this premise, all
reasoning about the general laws of political economy turns into mere twaddle. It was,
therefore, the great merit of Ricardo  that in his work on the princi ples of political
economy , published in 1817 , he fundamentally destroyed the old popular , and worn-
out fallacy that "wages determine prices," a fallacy which Adam Smith and his French
predecessors had spurned in the really scientific parts of their researches, but which
they reproduced in their more exoterical and vulgarizing chapters.
VI. Value and Labour
Citizens, I have now arrived at a point where I must enter upon the real development
of the question. I cannot promise to do this in a very satisfactory way, because to do
so I shou ld be obliged to go over the whole field of political economy . I can, as the
French would say, but "effleurer la question," touch upon the main point s. The first
question we have to put is: What is the value  of a commodity? How is it determined?
At first sight it would seem that the value of a commodity is a thing quite relative , and
not to be settled without considerin g one commodity in its relations to all other
commodities. In fact, in speaking of the value, the value in exchange of a commodity ,
we mean the propo rtional quantities in which it exchanges with all other commodities.
But then arises the question: How are the proportions in which commoditie s exchange
with each other regulated? We know  from experience that these proportions vary
infinitely . Taking one single commo dity, wheat, for instance, we shall find that a
quarter of wheat exchanges in almost countless variations of proportion with different
commodities. Yet, its value remaining  always the same , whether expressed in silk,
gold, or any other commodity , it must be something distinct from, and independent of,
136these differ ent rates of exchange  with different articles. It must be possible to express,
in a very dif ferent form, these various equations with various commodities.
Besides, if I say a quarter of wheat exchanges with iron in a certain proportion, or the
value of a quarter of wheat is expre ssed in a certain amount of iron, I say that the
value of wheat and its equivalent in iron are equal to some third thing , which is
neither wheat nor iron, because I supp ose them to express the same magnitude in two
different shapes. Either of them, the wheat or the iron, must, therefore, independently
of the other , be reducible to this third thing which is their common measure.
To elucid ate this point I shall recur  to a very simple geometrical illustration. In
comparing the areas of triangles of all possible forms and magnitudes, or comparing
triangles with rectangles, or any other rectilinear figure, how do we proceed? We
reduce the area of any triangle whatever to an expression quite different from its
visible form. Having found from the nature of the triangle that its area is equal to half
the product of its base by its height, we can then compare the different values of all
sorts of triangles, and of all rectilinea r figures whatever , because all of them may be
resolved into a certain number of triangles.
The same  mode of procedure must obtain with the values of commodities. We must be
able to reduce all of them to an expression common to all, and distinguis hing them
only by the proportions in which they contain that identical measure.
As the exchangeable value s of comm odities are only social functions  of those things,
and have nothing at all to do with the natural  qualities, we must  first ask, What is the
common social substance  of all commodities? It is labour . To produ ce a commodity a
certain amount of labour must be bestowed upon it, or worked up in it. And I say not
only labour , but social labour. A man who produ ces an article for his own immediate
use, to consume it himself, creates  a product , but not a commodity . As a self-
sustaining producer he has nothing to do with society . But to produce a commodity , a
man must  not only produce an article satisfying some social  want, but his labour itself
must form part and parcel of the total sum of labour expended by society . It must be
subordinate to the division of labour within society . It is nothing without the other
divisions of labour , and on its part is required to integrate  them.
If we consider commodities as values , we consider them  exclusively under the single
aspect of realized, fixed, or, if you like, crystallized social labour . In this respect they
can differ  only by representing greater or smaller quantities of labour , as, for example,
a greater amount of labour may be worked up in a silken handkerchief than in a brick.
But how does one measure quantities of labour ? By the time the labour lasts, in
measuring the labour by the hour, the day, etc. Of course, to apply this measure, all
sorts of labour are reduced to average or simple labour as their unit. We arrive,
therefore, at this conclusion. A commodity has a value , because it is a crystallization
of social labour . The greatness  of its value, or its relative  value, depends upon the
greater or less amount of that social substance contained in it; that is to say, on the
relative mass of labour necessary for its production. The relative values of
commodities  are, therefore, determined by the respective quantities or amounts of
labour , worked up, realized, fixed in them . The correlative  quantities of comm odities
which can be produced in the same time of labour  are equal . Or the value of one
137commodity is to the value of another commodity as the quantity of labour fixed in the
one is to the quantity of labour fixed in the other .
I suspect that many of you will ask, Does then, indeed, there exist such a vast or any
difference whatever , between determ ining the values of commodities by wages , and
determining them by the relative quantities of labour  necessary for their production?
You must, however , be aware that the rewar d for labou r, and quantity  of labour , are
quite disparate things. Suppose, for example, equal quantities of labour  to be fixed in
one quarter of wheat and one ounce of gold. I resort to the example because it was
used by Benjamin Franklin in his first Essay published in 1721, and entitled a modest
enquiry into the natur e and necessity  of a paper currency, where he, one of the first,
hit upon the true nature of value.
Well. We suppose, then, that one quarter of wheat and one ounce of gold are equal
values  or equivalents , because  they are crystalizations of equal amounts of average