an article , and the greater is its value. The value of a commodity , therefore, varies
directly as the quantity , and inversely as the productiveness, of the labour
incorporated in it.
164A thing can be a use value, without having value. This is the case whenever its utility
to man is not due to labour . Such are air, virgin soil, natural meadows, &c. A thing can
be useful , and the product of human  labour , without being a commodity . Whoever
directly satisfies his wants with the produce of his own labour , creates, indeed, use
values, but not commodities. In order to produce the latter , he must not only produce
use value s, but use values for other s, social use values. (And not only for others,
without more. The mediaeval peasant  produced quit-rent-corn for his feudal lord and
tithe-corn for his parson. But neithe r the quit-rent-corn nor the tithe-corn became
commodities by reason of the fact that they had been produced for others. To become
a commodity a product must be transferred to another , whom it will serve as a use
value, by means of an exchange.)   Lastly nothing can have value, without being an
object of utility . If the thing is useless , so is the labour contained in it; the labour does
not count as labour , and therefore creates no value.
§2 Two-Fold Character  of Labour Embodied  in Commodities
At first sight a commodity presented itself to us as a complex of two things – use
value and exchange value. Later on, we saw also that labour , too, possesse s the same
twofold nature; for, so far as it finds expression in value, it does not possess the same
characteristics that belong to it as a creator of use values. I was the first to point out
and to examine critically this twofold nature of the labour contained in commodities.
As this point is the pivot on which a clear comprehension of political econ omy turns,
we must go more into detail.
Let us take two commodities such as a coat and 10 yards of linen, and let the former
be double the value of the latter , so that, if 10 yards of linen = W, the coat = 2W .
The coat is a use value that satisfies a particular want. Its existence is the result of a
special sort of productive activity , the nature of which is determined by its aim, mode
of operation, subject, means, and result. The labour , whose utility is thus represented
by the value in use of its product, or which manifests itself by making its product a
use value, we call useful labour . In this connection we consider only its useful ef fect.
As the coat and the linen are two qualitatively different use values, so also are the two
forms of labour that produce them, tailoring and weaving. Were these two objects not
qualitatively different, not produced respectively by labour of different quality, they
could not stand to each other in the relation of commodities. Coats are not exchanged
for coats, one use value is not exchanged for another of the same kind.
To all the different varieties of values in use there correspond as many different kinds
of useful labour , classified according to the order , genus, species, and variet y to which
they belong in the social division of labour . This division of labour is a necessary
condition for the production of commodities, but it does not follow , conversely , that
the production of commodities is a necessary condition for the division of labour . In
the primitive Indian community there  is social division of labour , without production
of commo dities. Or, to take an example nearer home, in every factory the labour is
divided according to a system, but this division is not brought about by the operatives
mutually exchanging their individua l products. Only such products can become
commodities with regard to each other, as result from different kinds of labour , each
kind being carried on independently and for the account of private individuals.
165To resume, then: In the use value of each commodity there is contained useful labour ,
i.e., producti ve activi ty of a definite kind and exercised with a definite aim. Use
values cannot confront each other as commodities, unless the useful labour  embodied
in them is qualitatively different in each of them. In a community , the produce of
which in general takes the form of commodities, i.e., in a community of commodity
producers, this qualitative difference between the useful forms of labour that are
carried on independently by indivi dual producers, each on their own account,
develops into a complex system, a social division of labour .
Anyhow , whether the coat be worn by the tailor or by his customer , in either case it
operates as a use value. Nor is the relation between the coat and the labour that
produced it altered by the circumstance that tailoring may have become a special
trade, an independent branch of the social division of labour . Wherever the want of
clothing forced them to it, the human race made clothes for thousands of years,
without a single man becoming a tailor. But coats and linen, like every other element
of material wealth that is not the spontaneous produce of Nature, must invariably owe
their existence to a special productive activity , exercised with a definite aim, an
activity that approp riates particular nature-given materials to particular human wants.
So far therefore as labour is a creator of use value, is useful labour , it is a necessary
condition, independ ent of all forms of society , for the existence of the human race; it
is an eternal nature-imposed necessity , without which there can be no material
exchanges between man and Nature, and therefore no life.
The use values, coat, linen, &c., i.e., the bodies of commodities, are combinations of
two elements – matter and labour . If we take away the useful labour expe nded upon
them, a material substratum is alway s left, which is furnished by Nature without the
help of man. The latter can work only as Nature does, that is by changing the form of
matter .  Nay more, in this work of changing the form he is constantly helped by
natural forces. We see, then, that labour is not the only source of material  wealth, of
use values produced by labour . As William Petty puts it, labour is its father and the
earth its mother .
Let us now pass from the commod ity considered as a use value to the value of
commodities.
By our assumption, the coat is worth  twice as much as the linen. But this is a mere
quantitative difference, which for the present does not concern us. We bear in mind,
however , that if the value of the coat is double that of 10 yds of linen, 20 yds of linen
must have the same value as one coat. So far as they are values, the coat and the linen
are things of a like substance, objective expressions of essentially identical labour . But
tailoring and weaving are, qualitatively , different kinds of labour . There are, however ,
states of society in which one and the same man does tailoring and weaving
alternately , in which case these two forms of labour are mere modifications of the
labour of the same individual, and not special and fixed functions of different persons,
just as the coat which our tailor makes one day, and the trousers which he makes
another day, imply only a variation in the labour of one and the same individual.
Moreover , we see at a glance that, in our capitalist society , a given portion of human
labour is, in accordance with the varying demand, at one time supplied in the form of
166tailoring, at another in the form of weaving. This change may possibly not take place
without friction, but take place it must.
Productive activity , if we leave out of sight its special form, viz., the useful character
of the labour , is nothing but the expenditure of human labour power . Tailoring and
weaving, though qualitatively different productive activities, are each a productive
expenditure of human brains, nerves, and muscles, and in this sense are human labour .
They are but two different modes of expending human labour power . Of course, this
labour power, whic h remains the same under all its modifications, must have attained
a certain pitch of development before  it can be expended in a multiplicity  of modes.
But the value of a commodity represents human labour in the abstract, the expenditure
of human labour in general. And just as in society , a general or a banker plays a great
part, but mere man, on the other hand, a very shabby part, so here with mere human
labour . It is the expenditure of simple labour power , i.e., of the labour power which,
on an average, apart from any specia l development, exists in the organism of every
ordinary individual. Simple average labour , it is true, varies in character in different
countries and at different times, but in a particular society it is given. Skilled labour
counts only as simple labour intensifie d, or rather , as multiplied simple labour , a given
quantity of skilled  being considered equal to a greater quantity of simple labour .
Experience shows that this reduction is constantly being made. A commodity may be
the product of the most skilled labour , but its value, by equating it to the product of
simple unskilled labour, represents a definite quantity of the latter labour alone. The
different proportions in which different sorts of labour are reduced to unski lled labour
as their standard, are established by a social process that goes on behind the backs of
the producers, and, consequently , appear to be fixed by custom. For simpli city’s sake
we shall henceforth account every kind of labour to be unskilled, simple labour; by
this we do no more than save ourselves the trouble of making the reduction.
Just as, therefore, in viewing the coat and linen as values, we abstract from their
different use values , so it is with the labour represented by those values: we disregard
the difference between its useful forms, weaving and tailoring. As the use values, coat
and linen, are comb inations of special productive activities with cloth and yarn, while