demand for their respective commo dities would diminish. Consequent upon this
diminished demand  the prices of their commodities would fall. In these branches of
industry , therefore, the rate of profit would fall, not only in simple proportion to the
general rise in the rate of wages, but in the compound ratio of the general rise of
wages, the rise in the prices of necessaries, and the fall in the prices of luxuries.
What would be the consequence of this differ ence in the rates of profit for capit als
employed in the different branches of industry? Why , the consequence that generally
obtains whenever , from whatever reason, the average rate of profit comes to differ in
different spheres of production. Capital and labour would be transferred from the less
remunerative to the more remunerati ve branches; and this process of transfer would
go on until the supply in the one department of industry would have risen
proportionately to the increased demand, and would have sunk in the other
departments according to the decreased demand. This change effected, the general
rate of profit would again be equalized  in the different branches. As the whole
derangement origin ally arose from a mere change in the proportion of the demand for,
and supply of, different commodities , the cause ceasing, the effect would cease, and
PRICES would return to their former  level and equilibrium. Instead of being limited
to some branches of industry , the fall in the rate of profit consequent upon the rise of
wages would have  become general. According to our supposition, there would have
taken place no chan ge in the productiv e powers of labour , nor in the aggregate amount
of production, but that given amount of production would have changed its form . A
greater part of the produce would exist in the shape of necessaries, a lesser part in the
shape of luxuries, or what comes to the same, a lesser part would be exchanged for
foreign luxuries, and be consumed in its original form, or, what again comes to the
same, a greater part of the native produce would be exchanged for foreign necessaries
instead of for luxuries. The general rise in the rate of wages would, therefore, after a
temporary disturba nce of market prices, only result in a general fall of the rate of
profit without any permanent change in the prices of commodities. If I am told that in
the previous argument I assume the whole surplus wages to be spent upon necessaries,
I answer that I have made the supposition most advantageous to the opinion Citizen
Weston. If the surplus wages were spent upon articles formerly not enteri ng into the
127consumption of the working men, the real increase of their purchasing power would
need no proof. Being, however , only derived from an advance of wages, that increase
of their purchasing power must exactly correspond to the decrease of the purchasing
power of the capita lists. The aggregate demand  for commodities would, therefore, not
increase, but the constitue nt parts of that demand would change . The increasing
demand on the one side would be counterbalanced by the decreasing demand on the
other side. Thus the aggregate demand remaining stationary , no change whatever
could take place in the market price s of commodities. You arrive, therefore, at this
dilemma: Either the surplus wages are equally spent upon all articles of consumption -
then the expansion of demand on the part of the working class must be compensated
by the contraction of demand on the part of the capitalist class - or the surplus wages
are only spent upon some articles whose market prices will temporarily rise. The
consequent rise in the rate of profit in some, and the consequent fall in the rate of
profit in other branches of industry will produce a change in the distribution of capital
and labour , going on until the supply is brought up to the increased demand in the one
department of industry , and brought  down to the diminished demand in the other
departments of industry . On the one supposition there will occur no change in the
prices of commodities. On the other  supposition, after some fluctuations of market
prices, the exchang eable values of commodities will subside to the forme r level. On
both supp ositions the general rise in the rate of wages will ultimately result in nothing
else but a general fall in the rate of profit.
To stir up your powers of imagination Citizen Weston requested you to think of the
difficulties which a general rise of English agricultural wages from nine shillings to
eighteen shillings would produce. Think, he exclaimed, of the immense rise in the
demand for necessaries, and the consequent fearful rise in their prices! Now , all of
you know  that the average wages of the American agricultural labourer amount to
more than double that of the Englis h agricultural labourer , although the prices of
agricultural produc e are lower in the United States than in the United  Kingdom,
although the general relations of capital and labour obtain in the United States the
same as in England, and although the annual amount of production is much  smaller in
the United States than in England. Why , then, does our friend ring this alarm bell?
Simply to shift the real question before us. A sudden rise of wages from nine shillings
to eighteen shillings would be a sudd en rise to the amount of 100 percent. Now , we
are not at all discussing the question whether the general rate of wages in England
could be suddenly increased by 100 percent. We have nothing at all to do with the
magnitude  of the rise, which in every practical instance must depend on, and be suited
to, given circumsta nces. We have only to inquire how a general rise in the rate of
wages, even if restricted to one percent, will act.
Dismissing friend Weston's fancy rise of 100 percent, I propose calling your attention
to the real rise of wages that took place in Great Britain from 1849 to 1859.
You are all aware of the Ten Hours Bill, or rather Ten-and-a-half Hours Bill,
introduced since 1848. This was one of the greatest economical changes we have
witnessed. It was a sudden and compulsory rise of wages, not in some local  trades, but
in the leading industrial branches by which England sways the markets of the world.
It was a rise of wages under circumsta nces singularly unpropitious. Dr. Ure, Professor
128Senior , and all the other official economical mouthpieces of the middle class, [The
aristocracy was the upper class of Great Britain, while the capitalists composed what
was known to Marx as the middle class]  proved , and I must say upon much stronger
grounds than those of our friend Weston, that it would sound the death-knell of
English industry . They proved that it not only amounted to a simple rise of wages, but
to a rise of wages initiated by, and based upon, a diminution of the quantity of labour
employed. They asserted that the twelfth hour you wanted to take from the capitalist
was exactly the only hour from which he derived his profit. They threatened a
decrease of accumulation, rise of prices, loss of markets, stinting of production,
consequent reactio n upon wages, ultimate ruin. In fact, they declared Maximillian
Robespierre's Maximum Laws to be a small affair compared to it; and they were right
in a certain sense. Well, what was the result? A rise in the money wages of the factory
operatives, despite the curtailing of the working day, a great increase in the number of
factory hands employed, a continuous  fall in the prices of their products, a marvellous
development in the productive powers of their labour , an unheard-of progressive
expansion of the markets for their commodities. In Manchester , at the meeting, in
1860, of the Society for the Advance ment of Science, I myself heard Mr. Newman
confess that he, Dr. Ure, Senior , and all other official propounders of economical
science had been wrong, while the instinct of the people had been right. I mention Mr.
W. Newm an, not Professor Francis Newman, because he occupies an eminent position
in econom ical science, as the contributor to, and editor of , Mr. Thomas Tooke's
History Of Prices , that magnificent work which traces the history of prices from 1793
to 1856. If our friend Weston's fixed idea of a fixed amount of wages, a fixed amount
of production, a fixed degree of the productive power of labour , a fixed and
permanent will of the capitalist, and all his other fixedness and finality were correct,
Professor Senior's woeful forebodings would been right, and Robert Owen, who
already in 1816 proclaimed a general limitation of the working day the first
preparatory step to the emancipation of the working class, and actually in the teeth of
the general prejudice inaugurated it on his own hook in his cotton factory at New
Lanark, would have been wrong.
In the very same period during which the introduction of the Ten Hours Bill, and the
rise of wages consequent upon it, occurred, there took place in Great Britain, for
reasons which it would be out of place to enumerate here, a genera l rise in
agricultural wages . Although it is not required for my immediate purpose, in order
not to mislead you, I shall make some preliminary remarks.
If a man got two shillings weekly wages, and if his wages rose to four shillings, the
rate of wages  would have risen by 100 per cent. This would seem a very magnificent
thing if expressed as a rise in the rate of wages , although the actual amount of wages ,
four shillings weekly , would still remain a wretchedly small, a starvation pittance. You
must not, therefore , allow yourselves to be carried away by the high sounding per
cents in rate of wages. You must always ask, What was the original  amount?
Moreover , you will understand, that if there were ten men receiving each 2s. per
week, five men receiving each 5s., and five men receiving 11s. weekly , the twenty
men together would receive 100s., or 5 Pounds, weekly . If then a rise, say by 20 per