the values, coat and linen, are, on the other hand, mere homogeneous cong elations of
undif ferentiated labour, so the labour  embodied in these latter values does not count
by virtue of its productive relation to cloth and yarn, but only as being expenditure of
human labour power . Tailoring and weaving are necessary factors in the creation of
the use values, coat and linen, preci sely because these two kinds of labour are of
different qualities;  but only in so far as abstraction is made from their special
qualities, only in so far as both posse ss the same quality of being human labour , do
tailoring and weaving form the substance of the values of the same articles.
Coats and linen, however , are not merely values, but values of definite magnitude, and
according to our assumption, the coat is worth twice as much as the ten yards of linen.
Whence this difference in their values? It is owing to the fact that the linen contains
only half as much labour as the coat, and consequently , that in the produc tion of the
latter , labour power must have been expended during twice the time necess ary for the
production of the former .
167While, therefore, with reference to use value, the labour contained in a commodity
counts only qualitatively , with refere nce to value it counts only quantitatively , and
must first be reduced to human labour pure and simple. In the former case, it is a
question of How and What, in the latter of How much? How long a time? Since the
magnitude of the value of a commodity represents only the quantity of labour
embodied in it, it follows that all commodities, when taken in certain proportions,
must be equal in value.
If the productive power of all the different sorts of useful labour requir ed for the
production of a coat remains unchanged, the sum of the values of the coats produced
increases with their number . If one coat represents x days’  labour , two coats represent
2x days’  labour , and so on. But assume that the duration of the labour necessary for
the production of a coat becomes doubled or halved. In the first case one coat is worth
as much as two coats were before; in the second case, two coats are only worth as
much as one was before, although in both cases one coat renders the same service as
before, and the useful labour embodied in it remains of the same quality . But the
quantity of labour spent on its production has altered.
An increa se in the quantity of use values is an increase of material wealth. With two
coats two men can be clothed, with one coat only one man. Nevertheless, an increased
quantity of material wealth may corre spond to a simultaneous fall in the magnitude of
its value. This antagonistic movement  has its origin in the twofold character of labour .
Productive power has reference, of course, only to labour of some usefu l concrete
form, the efficacy of any special productive activity during a given time being
dependent on its productiveness. Useful labour becomes, therefore, a more or less
abundant source of products, in propo rtion to the rise or fall of its productiveness. On
the other hand, no change in this productiveness affects the labour represented by
value. Since produc tive power is an attribute of the concrete useful forms of labour , of
course it can no longer have any bearing on that labour , so soon as we make
abstraction from those concrete useful forms. However then productive power may
vary, the same labour , exercised during equal periods of time, always yields equal
amounts of value. But it will yield, during equal periods of time, different quantities
of values in use; more, if the productive power rise, fewer , if it fall. The same change
in productive power , which increases  the fruitfulness of labour , and, in consequence,
the quantity of use values produced by that labour , will diminish the total value of this
increased quantity of use values, provided such change shorten the total labour time
necessary for their production; and vice versâ .
On the one hand all labour is, speaking physiologically , an expenditure  of human
labour power , and in its character of identical abstract human labour , it creates and
forms the value of commodities. On the other hand, all labour is the expenditure of
human labour power in a special form and with a definite aim, and in this, its
character of concrete useful labour , it produces use values.
§3 The Form of Value
Commodities come  into the world in the shape of use values, articles, or goods, such
as iron, linen, corn, &c. This is their plain, homely , bodily form. They are, however ,
commodities, only because they are something twofold, both objects of utility , and, at
168the same time, depositories of value. They manifest themselves therefore as
commodities, or have the form of commodities, only in so far as they have two forms,
a physical or natural form, and a value form.
The realit y of the value of commodities differs in this respect from Dame Quickly ,
that we don’t know “where to have it.” The value of commodities is the very opposite
of the coarse materiality of their substance, not an atom of matter enters into its
composition. Turn and examine a single commodity , by itself, as we will, yet in so far
as it remains an object of value, it seems impossible to grasp it. If, however , we bear
in mind that the value of commodities has a purely social reality , and that they acquire
this realit y only in so far as they are expressions or embodiments of one identical
social substance, viz., human labour , it follows as a matter of course, that value can
only manifest itself in the social relation of commodity to commodity . In fact we
started from exchange value, or the exchange relation of commodities, in order to get
at the value that lies hidden behind it. We must now return to this form under which
value first appeared to us.
Every one knows, if he knows nothing else, that commodities have a value form
common to them all, and presenting a marked contrast with the varied bodily forms of
their use values. I mean their money form. Here, however , a task is set us, the
performance of which has never yet even been attempted by bourgeois  economy , the
task of tracing the genesis of this money form, of developing the expression of value
implied in the value relation of commodities, from its simplest, almost imperceptible
outline, to the dazzling money-form. By doing this we shall, at the same time, solve
the riddle presented by money .
The simp lest value -relation is evidently that of one commodity to some one other
commodity of a different kind. Hence the relation between the values of two
commodities supplies us with the simplest expression of the value of a single
commodity .
A. Elementary or Accidental Form Of Value
1. The two poles of the expression of value. Relative form and
Equivalent form
2. The Relative Form of value
3. The Equivalent form of value
4. The Elementary Form of value considered as a whole
B. Total or Expanded Form of value
1. The Expanded Relative form of value
2. The particular Equivalent form
3. Defects of the Total or Expanded form of value
C. The General Form of Value
1. The altered character of the form of value
2. The Interdependent Development of the Relative Form of Value, and
of the Equivalent Form
3. Transition from the General form of value to the Money form
169D. The Money-Form
§4 The Feti shism of Commodities and the Secr et thereo f
A commodity appears, at first sight, a very trivial thing, and easily understood. Its
analysis shows that it is, in reality , a very queer thing, abounding in metaphysical
subtleties and theological niceties. So far as it is a value in use, there is nothing
mysterious about it, whether we consider it from the point of view that by its
properties it is capable of satisfying human wants, or from the point that those
properties are the product of human labour . It is as clear as noon-day , that man, by his
industry , changes the forms of the materials furnished by Nature, in such a way as to
make them useful to him. The form of wood, for instance, is altered, by making a
table out of it. Yet, for all that, the table continues to be that common, every-day thing,
wood. But, so soon as it steps forth as a commodity , it is changed into something
transcendent. It not only stands with its feet on the ground, but, in relation to all other
commodities, it stands on its head, and evolves out of its wooden brain  grotesque
ideas, far more wonderful than “table-turning” ever was.
The myst ical character of commodities does not originate, therefore, in their use
value. Just as little does it proceed from the nature of the determining factors of value.
For, in the first place, however varied the useful kinds of labour , or productive
activities, may be, it is a physiologi cal fact, that they are functions of the human
organism, and that each such funct ion, whatever may be its nature or form, is
essentially the expenditure of human brain, nerves, muscles, &c. Secondly , with
regard to that which forms the ground-work for the quantitative determ ination of
value, namely , the duration of that expenditure, or the quantity of labour , it is quite
clear that there is a palpable difference between its quantity and quality . In all states of
society , the labour time that it costs to produce the means of subsiste nce, must
necessarily be an object of interest  to mankind, though not of equal interest in
different stages of development. And lastly , from the moment that men in any way
work for one another , their labour assumes a social form.
Whence, then, arises the enigmatical character of the product of labour , so soon as it
assumes the form of commodities? Clearly from this form itself. The equality of all
sorts of human labour is expressed objectively by their products all being equally
values; the measu re of the expenditure of labour power by the duration of that