if the market, i.e. the sphere of exchange, expands, then production grows in quantity
and the divisions between its different branches become deeper . A change in
distribution changes production, e.g. concentratio n of capital, different distribution of
the population between town and country , etc. Finally , the needs of consumption
determine production. Mutual interac tion takes place between the different moments.
This the case with every or ganic whole.
(3) The Method of Political Economy
When we consider a given count ry politico-economically , we begin with its
population, its distribution among classes, town, country , the coast, the different
branches of production, export and import, annual production and consumption,
commodity prices etc.
It seems to be correct to begin with the real and the concrete, with the real
precondition, thus to begin, in economics, with e.g. the population, which is the
foundation and the subject of the entire social act of production. However , on closer
examination this proves false. The population is an abstraction if I leave out, for
example, the classes of which it is composed. These classes in turn are an empty
phrase if I am not familiar with the elements on which they rest. E.g. wage labour ,
capital, etc. These latter in turn presu ppose exchange, division of labour , prices, etc.
For example, capital is nothing without wage labour , without value, money , price etc.
Thus, if I were to begin with the population, this would be a chaotic conception
[Vorstellung ] of the whole, and I would then, by means of further determination, move
analytically toward s ever more simple concepts [Begriff ], from the imagine d concrete
towards ever thinner abstractions until I had arrived at the simplest deter minations.
From there the journey would have to be retraced until I had finally arrived at the
population again, but this time not as the chaotic conception of a whole, but as a rich
totality of many determinations and relations. The former is the path historically
followed by economics at the time of its origins. The economists of the seventeenth
century , e.g., always begin with the living whole, with population, nation, state,
several states, etc.; but they always conclude by discovering through analy sis a small
number of determi nant, abstract, general relations such as division of labour , money ,
115value, etc. As soon as these individual moments had been more or less firmly
established and abstracted, there bega n the economic systems, which ascended from
the simple relations, such as labour , division of labour , need, exchange value, to the
level of the state, exchange betwee n nations and the world market. The latter is
obviously the scientifically correct method. The concrete is concrete becau se it is the
concentration of many determinations, hence unity of the diverse. It appears in the
process of thinking, therefore, as a process of concentration, as a result, not as a point
of departure, even though it is the point of departure in reality and hence also the point
of departure for observation [Anschauung ] and conception. Along the first path the
full conce ption was evaporated to yield an abstract determination; along the second,
the abstract determinations lead towards a reproduction of the concrete by way of
thought. In this way Hegel fell into the illusion of conceiving the real as the product
of though t concen trating itself, probing its own depths, and unfolding itself out of
itself, by itself, whereas the method of rising from the abstract to the concrete is only
the way in which thought appropriates the concrete, reproduces it as the concrete in
the mind. But this is by no means the process by which the concrete itself comes into
being. For example, the simplest economic category , say e.g. exchange value,
presupposes popul ation, moreover a population producing in specific relations; as
well as a certain kind of family , or commune, or state, etc. It can never exist other than
as an abstract, one-sided relation within an already given, concrete, living whole. As a
category , by contrast, exchange value  leads an antediluvian existence. Therefore, to
the kind of consciousness - and this is characteristic of the philosophical
consciousness - for which conceptual thinking is the real human being, and for which
the conceptual world as such is thus the only reality , the movement of the categories
appears as the real act of production - which only, unfortunately , receives a jolt from
the outside - whos e product is the world; and - but this is again a tautology - this is
correct in so far as the concrete totality is a totality of thoughts, concrete in thought, in
fact a product of thinking and comprehending; but not in any way a product of the
concept which thinks and generat es itself outside or above observ ation and
conception; a product, rather , of the working-up of observation and conc eption into
concepts. The totality as it appears in the head, as a totality of thoughts, is a product of
a thinking head, which appropriates the world in the only way it can, a way different
from the artistic, religious, practical and mental appropriation of this world. The real
subject retains its autonomous existence outside the head just as before; namely as
long as the head’ s conduct  is merely specula tive, merely theoretical. Hence, in the
theoretical method, too, the subject, society , must always be kept in mind as the
presupposition.
But do not these simpler categories also have an independent historical or natural
existence predatin g the more concrete ones? That depends. Hegel, for example,
correctly begins the Philosophy of Right with possession, this being the subject’ s
simplest juridical relation. But there is no possession preceding the family or master -
servant relations, which are far more concrete relations. However , it would  be correct
to say that there are families or clan groups which still merely possess,  but have  no
property . The simple category therefore appear s in relation to property as a relation of
simple families or clan groups. In the higher society it appears as the simpler relation
116of a developed organization. But the concrete substratum of which possession is a
relation is always presupposed. One can imagine an individual savage as possessing
something. But in that case possessio n is not a juridical relation. It is incorrect that
possession develops historically into the family . Possession, rather , always
presupposes this ‘more concrete juridical category’. There would still always remain
this much, however , namely that the simple categories are the expressions of relations
within which the less developed concrete may have already realized itself before
having posited the more many-sided connection or relation which is mentally
expressed in the more concrete category; while the more developed concrete preserves
the same category as a subordinate relation. Money may exist, and did exist
historically , before capital existed, before banks existed, before wage labour existed,
etc. Thus in this respect it may be said that the simpler category can express the
dominant relations of a less developed whole, or else those subordinate relations of a
more developed whole which alread y had a historic existence before this whole
developed in the direction expressed by a more concrete category . To that extent the
path of abstract thought, rising from the simple to the combined, would correspond to
the real historical process.
It may be said on the other hand that there are very developed but nevertheless
historically less mature forms of society , in which the highest forms of economy , e.g.
cooperation, a developed division of labour , etc., are found, even though there is no
kind of money , e.g. Peru. Among the Slav communities also, money and the exchange
which determines it play little or no role within the individual communities, but only
on their boundaries, in traffic with others; it is simply wrong to place exch ange at the
center of communa l society as the original, constituent element. It original ly appears,
rather , in the conn ection of the different communities with one another , not in the
relations between the different members of a single community . Further , although
money everywhere plays a role from  very early on, it is nevertheless a predominant
element, in antiquity , only within the confines of certain one-sidedly developed
nations, trading nations. And even in the most advanced parts of the ancient world,
among the Greeks and Romans, the full development of money , which is presupposed
in modern bourgeois society , appears only in the period of their dissolution . This very
simple category , then, makes a histori c appearance in its full intensity only in the most
developed conditions of society . By no means does it wade its way through all
economic relations. For example, in the Roman Empire, at its highest point of
development, the foundation remained taxes and payments in kind. The money system
actually completely developed there only in the army . And it never took over the
whole of labour . Thus, although the simpler category may have existed historically
before the more concrete, it can achie ve its full (intensive and extensive) development
precisely in a combined form of society , while the more concrete category was more
fully developed in a less developed form of society .
Labour seems a quite simple category . The conception of labour in this general form -
as labour as such - is also immeasurably old. Nevertheless, when it is economically
conceived in this simplicity , ‘labour ’ is as modern a category as are the relations
which create this simple abstraction. The Monetary System for example, still locates
wealth altogether objectively , as an external thing, in money . Compared with this
117standpoint, the commercial, or manufacture, system took a great step forward by