wrapped their sorry  “eternal truths,” all skin and bone, served to wonderfully increase
the sale of their goods amongst such a public.
And on its part German Socialism recognised, more and more, its own calling as the
bombastic representative of the petty-bour geois Philistine.
It proclai med the German nation to be the model nation, and the German petty
Philistine to be the typical man. To every villainous meanness of this model man, it
gave a hidden, higher , Socialistic interpretation, the exact contrary of its real
character . It went to the extreme lengt h of directly opposing the “brutally destructive”
tendency of Communism, and of proclaiming its supreme and impartial contempt of
all class struggles. With very few exceptions, all the so-called Socialist and
81Communist publica tions that now (1847) circulate in Germany belong to the domain
of this foul and enervating literature.
2. Conservative or Bourgeo is So cialism
A part of the bourgeoisie is desirous of redressing social grievances in order to secure
the continued existence of bour geois society .
To this section belong economists, philanthropists, humanitarians, improvers of the
condition of the working class, organisers of charity , members of societies for the
prevention of cruelty to animals, temperance fanatics, hole-and-corner reformers of
every imaginable kind. This form of socialism has, moreover , been work ed out into
complete systems.
We may cite Proudhon’ s Philosophis de la Misèr e as an example of this form.
The Socialistic bourgeois want all the advantages of modern social conditions without
the strugg les and dangers necessarily resulting therefrom. They desire the existing
state of society , minus its revolutionary and disintegrating elements. They wish for a
bourgeoisie withou t a proletariat. The bourgeoisie naturally conceives the world in
which it is supreme  to be the best; and bourgeois Socialism develops this comfortable
conception into various more or less complete systems. In requiring the proletariat to
carry out such a system, and thereby to march straightway into the social New
Jerusalem, it but requires in reality , that the proletariat should remain within the
bounds of existing society , but shoul d cast away all its hateful ideas conc erning the
bourgeoisie.
A second , and more practical, but less systematic, form of this Socialism sought to
depreciate every revolutionary movement in the eyes of the working class by showing
that no mere political reform, but only a change in the material conditions of
existence, in economical relations, could be of any advantage to them. By changes in
the mater ial condit ions of existence, this form of Socialism, however , by no means
understands abolition of the bourgeois relations of production, an abolition that can be
affected only by a revolution, but administrative reforms, based on the continued
existence of these relations; reforms, therefore, that in no respect affect the relations
between capital and labour , but, at the best, lessen the cost, and simplify the
administrative work, of bour geois government.
Bour geois Socialism attains adequate expression when, and only when, it becomes a
mere figure of speech.
Free trade: for the benefit of the work ing class. Protective duties: for the benefit of the
working class. Prison Reform: for the benefit of the working class. This is the last
word and the only seriously meant word of bour geois socialism.
It is summed up in the phrase: the bourgeois is a bourgeois – for the benefit of the
working class.
3. Critica l-Utopian So cialism and Communism
We do not here refer to that literature which, in every great modern revolution, has
always given voice to the demands of the proletariat, such as the writings of Babeuf
and others.
82The first direct attempts of the prole tariat to attain its own ends, made in times of
universal exciteme nt, when feudal society was being overthrown, necessarily failed,
owing to the then undeveloped state of the proletariat, as well as to the absence of the
economic condition s for its emancipa tion, conditions that had yet to be produced, and
could be produced  by the impendi ng bourgeois epoch alone. The revolutionary
literature that accompanied these first movements of the proletariat had necessarily a
reactionary charac ter. It inculcated universal asceticism and social levelling in its
crudest form.
The Socialist and Communist systems, properly so called, those of Saint-Simon,
Fourier , Owen, and others, spring into existence in the early undeveloped period,
described above, of the struggle between proletariat and bour geoisie.
The founders of these systems see, indeed, the class antagonisms, as well as the action
of the decomposing elements in the prevailing form of society . But the proletariat, as
yet in its infancy , offers to them the spectacle of a class without any historical
initiative or any independent political movement.
Since the developm ent of class antag onism keeps even pace with the development of
industry , the economic situation, as they find it, does not as yet offer to them the
material conditions  for the emancipati on of the proletariat. They therefore search after
a new social science, after new social laws, that are to create these conditions.
Historical action is to yield to their personal inventive action; historica lly created
conditions of emancipation to fanta stic ones; and the gradual, spontan eous class
organisation of the proletariat to an organisation of society especially contrived by
these inventors. Future history resolves itself, in their eyes, into the propaganda and
the practical carrying out of their social plans.
In the formation of their plans, they are conscious of caring chiefly for the interests of
the working class, as being the most suffering class. Only from the point of view of
being the most suf fering class does the proletariat exist for them.
The undeveloped state of the class struggle, as well as their own surroundings, causes
Socialists of this kind to consider themselves far superior to all class antagonisms.
They want to improve the condition of every member of society , even that of the most
favoured. Hence, they habitually appe al to society at large, without the distinction of
class; nay, by preference, to the ruling class. For how can people, when once they
understand their system, fail to see in it the best possible plan of the best possible state
of society?
Hence, they reject all political, and especially all revolutionary action; they wish to
attain their ends by peaceful means, necessarily doomed to failure, and by the force of
example, to pave the way for the new social Gospel.
Such fantastic pictu res of future society , painted at a time when the proletariat is still
in a very undeveloped state and has but a fantastic conception of its own position,
correspond with the first instinctive yearnings of that class for a general
reconstruction of society .
But these  Socialist and Communist publications contain also a critical element. They
attack every principle of existing society . Hence, they are full of the most valuable
83materials for the enlightenment of the working class. The practical measure s proposed
in them – such as the abolition of the distinction between town and country , of the
family , of the carrying on of industri es for the account of private individuals, and of
the wage system, the proclamation of social harmony , the conversion of the function
of the state into a more superintendence of production – all these proposals point
solely to the disappearance of class antagonisms which were, at that time, only just
cropping up, and which, in these publications, are recognised in their earliest
indistinct and undefined forms only. These proposals, therefore, are of a purely
Utopian character .
The signi ficance of Critical-Utopian Socialism and Communism bears an inverse
relation to historical development. In proportion as the modern class struggle develops
and takes definite shape, this fantastic standing apart from the contest, these fantastic
attacks on it, lose all practical value and all theoretical justification. Therefore,
although the originators of these systems were, in many respects, revolutionary , their
disciples have, in every case, formed mere reactionary sects. They hold fast by the
original views of their masters, in opposition to the progressive historical
development of the proletariat. They , therefore, endeavour , and that consistently , to
deaden the class struggle and to reconcile the class antagonisms. They still dream of
experimental realisation of their social Utopias, of founding isolated “pha lansteres,”
of establishing “Home Colonies,” or setting up a “Little Icaria” – duodecim o editions
of the New Jerusale m – and to realise all these castles in the air, they are compelled to
appeal to the feelings and purses of the bourgeois. By degrees, they sink into the
category of the reactionary [or] conservative Socialists depicted above, differing from
these only by more systematic pedantry , and by their fanatical and superstitious belief
in the miraculous ef fects of their social science.
They , therefore, violently oppose all political action on the part of the working class;
such action, according to them, can only result from blind unbelief in the new Gospel.
The Owe nites in England, and the Fourierists in France, respectively , oppose the
Chartists and the Réformistes .
IV. Position of the Communists in Relation to
the Various Existing Opposition Parties
Section II has made clear the relations of the Communists to the existing working -
class parties, such as the Chartists  in England and the Agrarian Reformers in America.
The Communists fight for the attainment of the immediate aims, for the enforcement
of the momentary interests of the working class; but in the movement of the present,
they also represent and take care of the future of that movement. In France, the