branches of labour , etc. each of which to start with develops independently of the
others and only gradually enters into relation with the others. Furthermore, it takes
place only very slowly; the various stages and interests are never completely
overcome, but only subordinated to the prevailing interest and trail along beside the
latter for centuries afterwards. It follows from this that within a nation itself the
individuals, even apart from their pecuniary circumstances, have quite different
56developments, and that an earlier interest, the peculiar form of intercourse of which
has already been ousted by that belonging to a later interest, remains for a long time
afterwards in possession of a traditional power in the illusory community (State, law),
which has won an existence independ ent of the individuals; a power which in the last
resort can only be broken by a revolution. This explains why, with reference to
individual points which allow of a more general summing-up, consciousness can
sometimes appear further advanced than the contemporary empirical relationships, so
that in the struggles of a later epoch one can refer to earlier theoreticians as
authorities.
On the other hand, in countries which, like North America, begin in an already
advanced historical epoch, the development proceeds very rapidly . Such countries
have no other natural premises than the individuals, who settled there and were led to
do so because the forms of intercourse of the old countries did not correspond to their
wants. Thus they begin with the most advanced individuals of the old countries, and,
therefore, with the correspondingly most advanced form of intercourse, before this
form of intercourse has been able to establish itself in the old countries. This is the
case with all colonies, insofar as they are not mere military or tradin g stations.
Carthage, the Greek colonies, and Iceland in the eleventh and twelfth centuries,
provide examples of this. A similar relationship issues from conquest, when a form of
intercourse which has evolved on another soil is brought over complete to the
conquered country : whereas in its home it was still encumbered with interests and
relationships left over from earlier periods, here it can and must be established
completely and without hindrance, if only to assure the conquerors' lasting power .
(England and Naples after the Norman conquest, when they received the most perfect
form of feudal or ganisation.)
[5. The Contradiction Between the Productive Forces and the
Form of Intercourse as the Basis for Social Revolution]
This contradiction between the produ ctive forces and the form of intercourse, which,
as we saw, has occurred several times in past history , without, however , endangering
the basis, necessari ly on each occasion burst out in a revolution, taking on at the same
time various subsidiary forms, such as all-embracing collisions, collisions  of various
classes, contradicti on of consciousness, battle of ideas, etc., political conflict, etc.
From a narrow point of view one may isolate one of these subsidiary forms and
consider it as the basis of these revolutions; and this is all the more easy as the
individuals who started the revolutions had illusions about their own activity
according to their degree of culture and the stage of historical development.
Thus all collisions in history have their origin, according to our view, in the
contradiction between the productive forces and the form of intercourse. Incidentally ,
to lead to collisions in a country , this contradiction need not necessarily have reached
its extreme limit in this particular country . The competition with industr ially more
advanced countries, brought about by the expansion of international intercourse, is
sufficient to produce a similar contradiction in countries with a backward industry
57(e.g. the latent proletariat in Germany brought into view by view by the competition
of English industry).
Conquest
This whole interpretation of history appears to be contradicted by the fact of conquest.
Up till now violence, war, pillage, murder and robbery , etc. have been accepted as the
driving force of history . Here we must limit ourselves to the chief points and take,
therefore, only the most striking example - the destruction of an old civilisation by a
barbarous people and the resulting formation of an entirely new organisation of
society . (Rome and the barbarians; feudalism and Gaul; the Byzantine Emp ire and the
Turks.)
With the conquering barbarian people  war itself is still, as indicated above , a regular
form of intercourse , which is the more eagerly exploited as the increase in population
together with the traditional and, for it, the only possible, crude mode of production
gives rise to the need for new means of production. In Italy, on the other hand, the
concentration of landed property (caused not only by buying-up and indebtedness but
also by inheritance, since loose living being rife and marriage rare, the old families
gradually died out and their possessions fell into the hands of a few) and its
conversion into grazing land (cause d not only by the usual economic forces still
operative today but by the importation of plundered and tribute-corn and the resultant
lack of demand for Italian corn) brought about the almost total disappearance of the
free popu lation. The very slaves died out again and again, and had constantly to be
replaced by new ones. Slavery remained the basis of the whole producti ve system.
The plebeians, midway between freemen and slaves, never succeeded in becoming
more than a proletarian rabble. Rome indeed never became more than a city; its
connection with the provinces was almost exclusively political and could, therefore,
easily be broken again by political events.
Nothing is more common than the notion that in history up till now it has only been a
question of taking. The barbarians take the Roman Empire, and this fact of taking is
made to explain the transition from the old world to the feudal system. In this taking
by barbarians, however , the question is, whether the nation which is conquered has
evolved industrial productive forces, as is the case with modern peoples, or whether
their productive forces are based for the most part merely on their associat ion and on
the community . Taking is further determined by the object taken. A banker's fortune,
consisting of paper , cannot be taken at all, without the taker's submitting to the
conditions of production and intercourse of the country taken. Similarly the total
industrial capital of a modern industrial country . And finally , everywhere there is very
soon an end to taking, and when there is nothing more to take, you have to set about
producing. From this necessity of producing, which very soon asserts itself, it follows
that the form of community adopted by the settling conquerors must corresp ond to the
stage of development of the productiv e forces they find in existence; or, if this is not
the case from the start, it must change according to the productive forces. By this, too,
is explained the fact, which people profess to have noticed everywhere in the period
following the migration of the people s, namely , that the servant was master , and that
58the conq uerors very soon took over language, culture and manners from the
conquered. The feudal system was by no means brought complete from Germany , but
had its origin, as far as the conqueror s were concerned, in the martial organisation of
the army during the actual conquest, and this only evolved after the conqu est into the
feudal system proper through the action of the productive forces found in the
conquered countries. To what an extent this form was determined by the productive
forces is shown by the abortive attempts to realise other forms derived from
reminiscences of ancient Rome (Charlemagne, etc.).
Contradictions of Big Industry: Revolution
Our investigation hitherto started from the instruments of production, and it has
already shown that private property was a necessity for certain industrial stages. In
industrie extractive  private property still coincides with labour; in small industry and
all agriculture up till now property is the necessary consequence of the existing
instruments of production; in big industry the contradiction between the instrument of
production and private property appe ars from the first time and is the product of big
industry; moreove r, big industry must be highly developed to produce this
contradiction. And thus only with big industry does the abolition of private property
become possible.
[9. Contradiction Between the Productive Forces and the Form
of Intercourse]
In big industry and competition the whole mass of conditions of existence, limitations,
biases of individua ls, are fused togeth er into the two simplest forms: private property
and labour . With money every form of intercourse, and intercourse itself, is
considered fortuitous for the individuals. Thus money implies that all previous
intercourse was only intercourse of individuals under particular conditio ns, not of
individuals as individuals. These conditions are reduced to two: accumula ted labour
or private  property , and actual labour . If both or one of these ceases, then intercourse
comes to a standsti ll. The modern economists themselves, e.g. Sismondi, Cherbuliez,
etc., oppo se ‘assoc iation of individuals’  to ‘association of capital.’  On the other hand,
the individuals themselves are entirely subordinated to the division of labour and
hence are brought into the most complete dependence on one anoth er. Private
property , insofar as within labour itself it is opposed to labour , evolves out of the
necessity of accumulation, and has still, to begin with, rather the form of the
communality; but in its further development it approaches more and more the modern
form of private property . The division  of labour implies from the outset the division of