143In buying the labouring power of the workman, and paying its value, the capitalist,
like every other purchaser , has acquired the right to consume or use the commodity
bought. You consume or use the labouring power of a man by making him work, as
you consume or use a machine by making it run. By buying the daily or weekly value
of the labouring power of the workma n, the capitalist has, therefore, acquire d the right
to use or make that labouring power during the whole day or week . The working day
or the working week has, of course, certain limits, but those we shall afterwards look
more closely at.
For the present I want to turn your attention to one decisive point. The value  of the
labouring power is determined by the quantity of labour necessary to maintain or
reproduce it, but the use of that labouring power is only limite d by the active energies
and phys ical stren gth of the labourer . The daily or weekly value  of the labouring
power is quite distinct from the daily  or weekly exercise of that power , the same as
the food a horse wants and the time it can carry the horseman are quite distinct. The
quantity of labour by which the value  of the workman's labouring power is limited
forms by no means a limit to the quantity of labour which his labouring power is apt
to perform. Take the example of our spinner . We have seen that, to daily reproduce his
labouring power , he must daily reprod uce a value of three shillings, which he will do
by working six hours daily . But this does not disable him from working ten or twelve
or more hours a day. But by paying the daily or weekly value  of the spinner's
labouring power the capitalist has acquired the right of using that labouring power
during the whole day or week . He will, therefore, make him work say, daily , twelve
hours. Over and above  the six hours required to replace his wages, or the value of his
labouring power , he will, therefore, have to work six other hours , which I shall call
hours of surplus labour , which surplus labour will realize itself in a surplus value  and
a surplus produce . If our spinner , for example, by his daily labour of six hours, added
three shillings' value to the cotton, a value forming an exact equivalent to his wages,
he will, in twelve hours, add six shillings' worth to the cotton, and produce a
proportional surplu s of yarn. As he has sold his labouring power to the capitalist, the
whole value of produce created by him belongs to the capitalist, the owner pro tem. of
his labouring power . By advancing three shillings, the capitalist will, theref ore, realize
a value of six shillings, because, advancing a value in which six hours of labour are
crystallized, he will receive in return a value in which twelve hours of labour are
crystallized. By repeating this same process daily , the capitalist will daily advance
three shillings and daily pocket six shillings, one half of which will go to pay wages
anew , and the other half of which will form surplus value , for which the capitalist
pays no equivalent. It is this sort of exchange between capital and labour  upon which
capitalistic product ion, or the wages system, is founded, and which must constantly
result in reproduci ng the working man as a working man, and the capitalist as a
capitalist.
The rate of surplus value , all other circumstances remaining the same, will depend on
the propo rtion between that part of the working day necessary to reproduce the value
of the labouring power and the surplus time or surplus labour  performed for the
capitalist. It will, therefore, depend on the ratio in which the working day is prolonged
144over and above that extent , by working which  the working man would only reproduce
the value of his labouring power , or replace his wages.
IX. Value of Labour
We must now retur n to the expression , "value, or price of labour ." We have seen that,
in fact, it is only the value of the labouring power , measured by the values of
commodities neces sary for its maintenance. But since the workman receives his
wages after  his labour is performed, and knows, moreover , that what he actually gives
to the capitalist is his labour , the value or price of his labouring power necessarily
appears to him as the price  or value of his labour itself . If the price of his labouring
power is three shillings, in which six hours of labour are realized, and if he works
twelve hours, he necessarily conside rs these three shillings as the value or price of
twelve hours of labour, although these twelve hours of labour realize themselves in a
value of six shillings. A double consequence flows from this.
Firstly . The value or price of the labouring power  takes the semblance of the price or
value of labour itself, although, strictly speaking, value and price of labour are
senseless terms.
Secondly . Although  one part only of the workman's daily labour is paid, while the
other part is unpaid , and while that unpaid or surplus labour constitutes exactly the
fund out of which surplus value  or profit is formed, it seems as if the aggregate labour
was paid labour .
This false appearance distinguishes wages labour  from other historical  forms of
labour . On the basis of the wages system even the unpaid  labour seems to be paid
labour . With the slave , on the contrary , even that part of his labour which is paid
appears to be unpaid. Of course, in order to work the slave must live, and one part of
his working day goes to replace the value of his own maintenance. But since no
bargain is struck between him and his master , and no acts of selling and buying are
going on between the two parties, all his labour seems to be given away for nothing.
Take, on the other hand, the peasant serf, such as he, I might say, until yesterday
existed in the whol e of East of Europe. This peasant worked, for example,  three days
for himself on his own field or the field allotted to him, and the three subsequent days
he perform ed compulsory and gratuitous labour on the estate of his lord. Here, then,
the paid and unpai d parts of labour were sensibly separated, separated in time and
space; and our Liberals overflowed with moral indignation at the preposterous notion
of making a man work for nothing.
In point of fact, however , whether a man works three days of the week for himself on
his own field and three days for nothi ng on the estate of his lord, or whether he works
in the factory or the workshop six hours daily for himself and six for his employer ,
comes to the same , although in the latter case the paid and unpaid portions of labour
are insepa rably mixed up with each other , and the nature of the whole transaction is
completely masked by the intervention of a contract  and the pay received at the end of
the week.  The gratuitous labour appe ars to be voluntarily given in the one instance,
and to be compulsory in the other . That makes all the dif ference.
145In using the word "value of labour ," I shall only use it as a popular slang term for
"value of labouring power ."
X. Profit is Made by Sel ling a Commodity at its Value
Suppose an average hour of labour to be realized in a value equal to sixpence, or
twelve average hours of labour to be realized in six shillings. Suppose, further , the
value of labour to be three shillings or the produce of six hours' labour . If, then, in the
raw material, machinery , and so forth , used up in a commodity , twenty-four hours of
average labour were realized, its value would amount to twelve shillings. If,
moreover , the workman employed by the capitalist added twelve hours of labour to
those means of production, these twelve hours would be realized in an additional
value of six shillings. The total value of the product  would, therefore, amount to
thirty-six hours of realized labour , and be equal to eighteen shillings. But as the value
of labour , or the wages paid to the workman, would be three shillings only, no
equivalent would have been paid by the capitalist for the six hours of surplus labour
worked by the workman, and realized  in the value of the commodity . By selling this
commodity at its value for eighteen shillings, the capitalist would, therefore, realize a
value of three shillings, for which had paid no equivalent. These three shillings would
constitute the surplus value or profit pocketed by him. The capitalist would
consequently realiz e the profit of three shillings, not by selling his commodity at a
price over and above  its value, but by selling it at its r eal value .
The value of a commodity is determined by the total quantity of labour  contained in
it. But part of that quantity of labour is realized in a value for which and equivalent
has been paid in the form of wages;  part of it is realized in a value for which NO
equivalent has been paid. Part of the labour contained in the commodity is paid
labour; part is unpaid  labour. By selling, therefore, the commodity at its value, that is,
as the crystallization of the total quantity of labour  bestowed upon it, the capitalist
must necessarily sell it at a profit. He sells not only what has cost him an equivalent,
but he sells also what has cost him nothing, although it has cost his workman labour .
The cost of the commodity to the capitalist and its real cost are dif ferent things.
I repeat, therefore, that normal and average profits are made by selling commodities
not above , but at their r eal values .
XI. The Di fferen t Parts into which  Su rplus Value is
Deco mposed
The surplus value, or that part of the total value of the commodity in which the
surplus labour  or unpaid labour  of the working man is realized, I call profit. The
whole of that profit  is not pocketed by the employing capitalist. The monop oly of land
enables the landlord to take one part of that surplus value , under the name of rent,
whether the land is used for agricultural buildings or railways, or for any other
productive purpose. On the other hand, the very fact that the possession of the