revolution  which will raise it not only to the official level  of modern nations, but to the
height of humanity  which will be the near future of those nations?
The weap on of criticism cannot, of course, replace criticism of the weapo n, material
force must be overthrown by material force; but theory also becomes a material force
as soon as it has gripped the masses. Theory is capable of gripping the masses as soon
as it demonstrates  ad homin em, and it demonstrates ad homin em as soon as it
becomes radical. To be radical is to grasp the root of the matter . But, for man, the root
is man himself. The evident proof of the radicalism of German theory , and hence of its
practical energy, is that is proceeds from a resolute positive  abolition of religio n. The
criticism of religion ends with the teaching that man is the highest essence for man –
hence, with the categoric imperati ve to overthr ow all relations  in which  man is a
debased, enslaved,  abandoned, despicable essence, relations which cannot be better
described than by the cry of a Frenchman when it was planned to introduce a tax on
dogs: Poor dogs! They want to treat you as human beings!
Even historically , theoretical emancipation has specific practical significance for
Germany . For Germany’ s revolutionary  past is theoretical , it is the Reformation . As
the revolu tion then began in the brain of the monk , so now it begins in the brain of the
philosopher .
Luther , we grant, overcame bondage out of devotion  by replacing it by bondage out of
conviction . He shatt ered faith in authority because he restored the authority of faith.
He turned priests into laymen because he turned laymen into priests. He freed man
from outer religiosity because he made religiosity the inner man. He freed the body
from chains because he enchained the heart.
But, if Protestantism was not the true solution of the problem, it was at least the true
setting of it. It was no longer a case of the layman’ s struggle against the priest outside
himself  but of his struggle against his own priest inside himself , his priestly nature.
And if the Protesta nt transformation of the German layman into priests emancipated
the lay popes, the princes , with the whole of their priestly clique, the privileged and
philistines, the philosophical transf ormation of priestly Germans into men will
emancipate the people . But, secularization  will not stop at the confiscation of church
estates  set in motion main ly by hypocritical Prussia any more than emancipation stops
at princes . The Peasant War, the most radical fact of German history , came to grief
because of theology . Today , when theology itself has come to grief, the most unfree
fact of German history , our status quo, will be shattered against philosophy . On the
eve of the Reforma tion, official Germany was the most unconditional slave of Rome.
10On the eve of its revolution, it is the unconditional slave of less than Rome, of Prussia
and Austria, of country junkers and philistines.
Meanwhile, a major difficulty seems to stand in the way of a radical  German
revolution.
For revolutions require a passive  element, a materi al basis. Theory is fulfilled in a
people only insofar as it is the fulfilment of the needs of that people. But will the
monstrous discrepancy between the demands of German thought and the answers of
German reality find a corresponding discrepancy between civil society and the state,
and between civil society and itself? Will the theoretical needs be immediate practical
needs? It is not enough for thought to strive for realization, reality must itself strive
towards thought.
But Germ any did not rise to the intermediary stage of political emancipation at the
same time as the modern nations. It has not yet reached in practice the stages which it
has surpas sed in theory . How can it do a somersault , not only over its own limitations,
but at the same time over the limitatio ns of the modern nations, over limitations which
it must in reality feel and strive for as for emancipation from its real limitations? Only
a revolution of radical needs can be a radical revolution and it seems that precisely the
preconditions and ground for such needs are lacking.
If German y has accompanied the development of the modern nations only with the
abstract activity of thought without taking an effective share in the real struggle of
that development, it has, on the other hand, shared the sufferings  of that developme nt,
without sharing in its enjoyment, or its partial satisfaction. To the abstract activity on
the one hand corre sponds the abstract suffering on the other . That is why Germany
will one day find itself on the level of European decadence before ever having been
on the level of European emancipation. It will be comparable to a fetish worshipper
pining away with the diseases of Christianity .
If we now consi der the German governme nts, we find that because of the
circumstances of the time, because of Germany’ s condition, because of the standpoint
of German education, and, finally , under the impulse of its own fortunate instinct, they
are driven to combine the civilized shortcom ings of the moder n state world , the
advantages of which we do not enjoy , with the barbaric deficiencies of the ancien
régime , which we enjoy in full; hence, Germ any must share more and more, if not in
the reasonableness, at least in the unreasonableness of those state format ions which
are beyond the bounds of its status quo. Is there in the world, for example, a country
which shares so naively in all the illusions of constitutional statehood without sharing
in its realities as so-called constitution al Germany? And was it not perforce the notion
of a German gover nment to combine the tortures of censorship with the tortures of the
French September [anti-press] laws whic h provid e for freedom of the press? As you
could find the gods of all nations in the Roman Pantheon, so you will find in the
Germans’  Holy Roman Empire all the sins of all state forms. That this eclecticism will
reach a so far unprecedented height is guaranteed in particular by the political-
aesthetic gourmanderie  of a German king who intended to play all the roles of
monarchy , whether feudal or democratic, if not in the person of the people, at least in
his own person, and if not for the people, at least for himself . Germany , as the
11deficiency of the political present constituted a world of its own, will not be able to
throw down the specific German limitations without throwing down the general
limitation of the political present.
It is not the radical  revolution, not the general human  emancipation which is a
utopian dream for Germany , but rather the partial, the merely political revolution, the
revolution which leaves the pillars of the house standing. On what is a partial, a
merely political revolution based? On part of civil societ y emancipating itself and
attaining general  domination; on a definite class, proceeding from its particular
situation ; undertaking the general emancipation of society . This class emancipates the
whole of society , but only provided the whole of society is in the same situation as
this class – e.g., possesses money and education or can acquire them at will.
No class of civil society can play this role without arousing a moment of enthusiasm
in itself and in the masses, a moment  in which it fraternizes and merges with society
in general, becomes confused with it and is perceived and acknowledged as its
general representative , a moment in which its claims and rights are truly the claims
and rights  of society itself, a moment in which it is truly the social head and the social
heart. Only in the name of the general  rights of society can a particular class vindicate
for itself general domination. For the storming of this emancipatory position, and
hence for the politi cal exploitation of all sections of society in the interests of its own
section, revolutiona ry energy and spiritual self-feeling alone are not sufficient. For the
revolution of a nation , and the emancipation of a particular class  of civil society to
coincide, for one estate to be acknowledged as the estate of the whole society , all the
defects of society must conversely be concentrated in another class, a particular estate
must be the estate of the general stumbling-block, the incorporation of the general
limitation, a particular social sphere must be recognized as the notorious crime of the
whole of society , so that liberation from that sphere appears as general self-liberation.
For one estate to be par excellence  the estate of liberation, another estate must
conversely be the obvious estate of oppression. The negative general significance of
the French nobility and the French clergy determined the positive general significance
of the nearest neighboring and opposed class of the bourgeoisie .
But no particular class in Germany has the constituency , the penetration, the courage,
or the ruthlessness that could mark it out as the negative representative of society . No
more has any estate the breadth of soul that identifies itself, even for a moment, with
the soul of the nation, the geniality that inspires material might to politica l violence,
or that revolutionary daring which flings at the adversary the defiant words: I am
nothing but I must be everything . The main stem of German morals and honesty , of
the classes as well as of individuals, is rather that modest egoism  which asserts its
limitedness and allows it to be asserted against itself. The relation of the various
sections of German society is therefore not dramatic but epic. Each of them begins to
be aware of itself and begins to camp  beside the others with all its partic ular claims
not as soon as it is oppressed, but as soon as the circumstances of the time, without
the sectio n’s own participation, creat es a social substratum on which it can in turn