consumption, no production; since production would then be purposeless.
Consumption produces production in a double way, (1) because a product becomes a
real produ ct only by being consumed.  For example, a garment becomes a real garment
only in the act of being worn; a house where no one lives is in fact not a real house;
thus the product, unlike a mere natura l object, proves itself to be, becomes,  a produc t
only through consumption. Only by decomposing the product does consumption give
the product the finishing touch; for the product is production not as objectified
activity , but rather  only as object for the active subject; (2) because consumption
creates the need for new production, that is it creates the ideal, internally impelling
cause for production, which is its presupposition. Consumption creates the motive for
production; it also creates the object which is active in production as its determinant
aim. If it is clear that production offers consumption its external object, it is therefore
equally clear that consumption ideally posits the objec t of production as an intern al
image, as a need, as drive and as purpose. It creates the objects of productio n in a still
subjective form. No production without a need. But consumption reproduces the need.
Production, for its part, correspondingly (1) furnishes the material and the object for
consumption. Consumption without an object is not consumption; therefore, in this
109respect, production creates, produces consumption. (2) But the object is not the only
thing which production creates for consumption. Production also gives consumption
its specificity , its character , its finish. Just as consumption gave the product its finish
as product, so does production give finish to consumption. Firstly , the object is not an
object in general, but a specific objec t which must be consumed in a specif ic manner ,
to be mediated in its turn by produ ction itself. Hunger is hunger , but the hunger
gratified by cooked meat eaten with a knife and fork is a different hunge r from that
which bolts down raw meat with the aid of hand, nail and tooth. Production thus
produces not only the object but also the manner of consumption, not only objectively
but also subjectively . Production thus creates the consumer . (3) Production not only
supplies a material for the need, but it also supplies a need for the material. As soon as
consumption emer ges from its initial state of natural crudity and immediacy  - and, if it
remained at that stage, this would be because production itself had been arrested there
- it becomes itself mediated as a drive by the object. The need which consumption
feels for the objec t is created by the perception of it. The object of art - like every
other product - creates a public which is sensitive to art and enjoys beauty . Production
thus not only creates an object for the subject, but also a subject for the object. Thus
production produces consumption (1) by creating the material for it; (2) by
determining the manner of consump tion; and (3) by creating the products, initially
posited by it as objects, in the form of a need felt by the consumer . It thus produces
the objec t of consumption, the manner of consumption and the motive of
consumption. Consumption likewise produces the producer ’s inclination  by
beckoning to him as an aim-determining need.
The identities between consumption and production thus appear threefold:
(1) Immediate identity:  Production is consumption, consumption is production.
Consumptive production. Productive consumption. The political economists call both
productive consumption. But then make a further distinction. The first figures as
reproduction, the second as productive consumption. All investigations into the first
concern productive or unproductive labour; investigations into the second concern
productive or non-productive consumption.
(2) [In the sense] that one appears as a means for the other , is mediated by the other:
this is expressed as their mutual dependence; a movement which relates them to one
another , makes them appear indispensable to one another , but still leaves them
external to each other . Production creates the material, as external object, for
consumption; consumption creates the need, as internal object, as aim, for production.
Without production no consumption; without consumption no production. [This
identity] figures in economics in many dif ferent forms.
(3) Not only is production immediat ely consumption and consumption immediately
production, not only is production a means for consumption and consumption the aim
of production, i.e. each supplies the other with its object (production supplying the
external object of consumption, consumption the conceived object of production); but
also, each of them, apart from being immediately the other , and apart from mediating
the other , in additio n to this creates the other in completing itself, and creates itself as
the other . Consumption accomplishes the act of production only in completing the
110product as product by dissolving it, by consuming its independently material form, by
raising the inclination developed in the first act of production, through the need for
repetition, to its finished form; it is thus not only the concluding act in which the
product becomes product, but also that in which the producer becomes producer . On
the other side, production produces consumption by creating the specific manner of
consumption; and, further , by creating the stimulus of consumption, the ability to
consume, as a need . This last identity , as determined under (3), (is) frequen tly cited in
economics in the relation of demand  and supply , of objects and needs, of socially
created and natural needs.
Thereupon, nothing simpler for a Hegelian than to posit production and consumption
as identical. And this has been done  not only by socialist belletrists but by prosaic
economists them selves, e.g. Say; in the form that when one looks at an entire people,
its produc tion is its consumption. Or, indeed, at humanity in the abstr act. Storch
demonstrated Say’s error , namely that e.g. a people does not consume its entire
product, but also creates means of production, etc., fixed capital, etc. To regard
society as one single subject is, in addition, to look at it wrongly; speculatively . With a
single subject, production and consumption appear as moments of a single act. The
important thing to emphasize here is only that, whether production and consumption
are viewed as the activity of one or of many individuals, they appear in any case as
moments of one process, in which production is the real point of departure  and hence
also the predomina nt moment. Consumption as urgency , as need, is itself an intrinsic
moment of productive activity . But the latter is the point of departure for realization
and hence  also its predominant moment; it is the act through which the whole process
again runs its cours e. The individual produces an object and, by consuming it, returns
to himsel f, but returns as a productive and self-reproducing individual. Consumption
thus appears as a moment of production.
In society , however , the producer ’s relation to the product, once the latter is finished,
is an external one, and its return to the subject depends on his relations to other
individuals. He does not come into possession of it directly . Nor is its immediate
appropriation his purpose when he produces in society . Distribution  steps between the
producers and the products, hence between production and consumption, to determine
in accordance with social laws what the producer ’s share will be in the world of
products.
Now , does distribution stand at the side of and outside production as an autonomous
sphere?
Distribution and production
(b) When one examines the usual works of economics, it is immediately striking that
everything in them is posited doubly . For example, ground rent, wages, interest and
profit figure under distribution, while  land, labour and capital figure under production
as agents of produc tion. In the case of capital, now, it is evident from the outset that it
is posited doubly , (1) as agent of production, (2) as source of income, as a determinant
of specifi c forms of distribution. Interest and profit thus also figure as such in
production, in so far as they are forms in which capital increases, grows, hence
111moments of its own production. Interest and profit as forms of distribution presuppose
capital as agent of production. They are modes of distribution whose presup position is
capital as agent of production. They are, likewise, modes of reproduction of capital.
The category of wages, similarly , is the same as that which is examined under a
different heading as wage labour: the characteristic which labour here possesses as an
agent of production appears as a characteristic of distribution. If labour were not
specified as wage labour , then the manner in which it shares in the products would not
appear as wages; as, for example, under slavery . Finally , to take at once the most
developed form of distribution, ground rent, by means of which landed property
shares in the product, presupposes large-scale landed property (actually , large-scale
agriculture) as agent of production, and not merely land as such, just as wages do not
merely presuppose labour as such. The relations and modes of distribution thus appear
merely as the obve rse of the agents of production. An individual who participates in
production in the form of wage labour shares in the products, in the results of
production, in the form of wages. The structure [Gliederung ] of distribution is
completely determ ined by the structu re of production. Distribution is itself a product
of produc tion, not only in its object, in that only the results of production can be
distributed, but also in its form, in that the specific kind of participation in production