person the parts of legislator , judge,  and executor , and filches the money to boot.
Another measure of this class was the surrender to associations of workmen, under
93reserve of compensation, of all closed workshops and factories, no matter whether the
respective capitalists had absconded or preferred to strike work.
The financial measures of the Commune, remarkable for their sagacity and
moderation, could only be such as were compatible with the state of a besieged town.
Considering the colossal robberies committed upon the city of Paris by the great
financial companies and contractors, under the protection of Haussman, the Commune
would have had an incomparably better title to confiscate their property than Louis
Napoleon had against the Orleans  family . The Hohenzollern and the English
oligarchs, who both have derived a good deal of their estates from church  plunders,
were, of course, greatly shocked at the Commune clearing but 8,000f out of
secularization.
While the Versailles government, as soon as it had recovered some spirit and strength,
used the most violent means against the Commune; while it put down the free
expression of opinion all over France,  even to the forbidding of meetings of delegates
from the large towns; while it subjected Versailles and the rest of France to an
espionage far surpassing that of the Second Empire; while it burned by its gendarme
inquisitors all papers printed at Paris, and sifted all correspondence from and to Paris;
while in the Natio nal Assembly the most timid attempts to put in a word for Paris
were howled down in a manner unkn own even to the Chambr e introuvab le of 1816;
with the savage warfare of Versailles outside, and its attempts at corruption and
conspiracy inside Paris – would the Commune not have shamefully betrayed its trust
by affecting to keep all the decencies and appearances of liberalism as in a time of
profound peace? Had the government of the Commune been akin to that of M. Thiers,
there would have been no more occasion to suppress Party of Order papers at Paris
that there was to suppress Communal papers at Versailles.
It was irritating indeed to the Rurals that at the very same time they declared the
return to the church to be the only means of salvation for France, the infidel
Commune unearthe d the peculiar mysteries of the Picpus nunnery , and of the Church
of St. Laurent. It was a satire upon M. Thiers that, while he showered grand crosses
upon the Bonapartist generals in acknowledgment of their mastery in losing battles,
singing capitulations, and turning cigarettes at Wilhelmshöhe, the Commune
dismissed and arrested its generals whenever they were suspected of negle cting their
duties. The expulsion from, and arrest by, the Commune of one of its members
[Blanchet] who had slipped in under a false name, and had under gone at Lyons six
days’  imprisonment for simple bankruptcy , was it not a deliberate insult hurled at the
forger, Jules Favre, then still the foreign minister of France, still selling France to
Bismarck, and still dictating his orders to that paragon government of Belgium? But
indeed the Commu ne did not preten d to infallibility , the invariable attribute of all
governments of the old stamp. It published its doings and sayings, it initiated the
public into all its shortcomings.
In every revolution there intrude, at the side of its true agents, men of different stamp;
some of them survivors of and devot ees to past revolutions, without insig ht into the
present movement, but preserving popular influence by their known honesty and
courage, or by the sheer force of tradition; others mere brawlers who, by dint of
94repeating year after year the same set of stereotyped declarations against the
government of the day, have sneaked  into the reputation of revolutionists of the first
water . After March  18, some such men did also turn up, and in some cases contrived
to play pre-eminent parts. As far as their power went, they hampered the real action of
the working class, exactly as men of that sort have hampered the full deve lopment of
every previous revolution. They are an unavoidable evil: with time they are shaken
off; but time was not allowed to the Commune.
Wonderful, indeed , was the change the Commune had wrought in Paris! No longer
any trace of the tawdry Paris of the Second Empire! No longer was Paris the
rendezvous of British landlords, Irish absentees, American ex-slaveholders and
shoddy men, Russian ex-serfowners, and Wallachian boyards. No more corpses at the
morgue, no nocturnal burglaries, scarc ely any robberies; in fact, for the first time since
the days of Februa ry 1848, the streets of Paris were safe, and that without any police
of any kind.
“We,” said a member of the Commu ne, “hear no longer of assassination, theft, and
personal assault; it seems indeed as if the police had dragged along with it to
Versailles all its Conservative friends.”
The cocottes  had refound the scent of their protectors – the absconding men of family ,
religion, and, above all, of property . In their stead, the real women of Paris showed
again at the surface – heroic, noble, and devoted, like the women of antiquity .
Working, thinking fighting, bleeding Paris – almost forgetful, in its incub ation of a
new society , of the Cannibals at its gates – radiant in the enthusiasm of its historic
initiative!
Opposed to this new world at Paris, behold the old world at Versailles – that assembly
of the ghouls of all defunct regimes, Legitimists and Orleanists, eager to feed upon the
carcass of the nation – with a tail of antediluvian republicans, sanctioning, by their
presence in the Assembly , the slaveholders’  rebellion, relying for the maintenance of
their parliamentary  republic upon the vanity of the senile mountebank at its head, and
caricaturing 1789 by holding their ghastly meetings in the Jeu de Paume . There it
was, this Assembly , the representative of everything dead in France, propped up to the
semblance of life by nothing but the swords of the generals of Louis Bonaparte. Paris
all truth, Versailles all lie; and that lie vented through the mouth of Thiers.
Thiers tells a deputation of the mayors of the Seine-et-Oise – “You may rely upon my
word, which I have never broken!”
He tells the Assembly itself that “it was the most freely elected and most liberal
Assembly France ever possessed”; he tells his motley soldiery that it was “the
admiration of the world, and the finest army France ever possessed”; he tells the
provinces that the bombardment of Paris by him was a myth: “If some cannon-shots
have been fired, it was not the deed of the army of Versailles, but of some insur gents
trying to make believe that they are fighting, while they dare not show their faces.” He
again tells the provinces that “the artillery of Versailles does not bombard  Paris, but
only cann onades it.” He tells the Archbishop of Paris that the pretended executions
and repris als (!) attributed to the Versailles troops were all moonshine. He tells Paris
95that he was only anxious “to free it from the hideous tyrants who oppress it,” and that,
in fact, the Paris of the Commune was “but a handful of criminals.”
The Paris of M. Thiers was not the real Paris of the “vile multitude,” but a phantom
Paris, the Paris of the francs-fileurs , the Paris of the Boulevards, male and female –
the rich, the capitalist, the gilded, the idle Paris, now thronging with its lackeys, its
blacklegs, its literary bohème , and its cocottes  at Versai lles, Saint-Denis, Rueil, and
Saint-Germain; considering the civil war but an agreeable diversion, eyeing the battle
going on through telescopes, counting the rounds of cannon, swearing by their own
honor and that of their prostitutes, that the performance was far better got up than it
used to be at the Porte St. Martin. The men who fell were really dead; the cries of the
wounded were cries in good earnest; and, besides, the whole thing was so intensely
historical.
This is the Paris of M. Thiers, as the emigration of Coblenz was the Franc e of M. de
Calonne.
96The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis
Bonaparte
(1852) Chapter 1
Hegel remarks somewhere that all great world-historic facts and personages  appear , so
to speak, twice. He forgot to add: the first time as tragedy , the second time as farce.
Caussidière for Danton, Louis Blanc for Robespierre, the Montagne of 1848 to 1851
for the Montagne of 1793 to 1795, the nephew for the uncle. And the same  caricature
occurs in the circumstances of the second edition of the Eighteenth Brumaire.
Men make their own history , but they do not make it as they please; they do not make
it under self-selected circumstances, but under circumstances existing already, given
and trans mitted from the past. The tradition of all dead generations weighs like a
nightmare on the brains of the living. And just as they seem to be occupied with
revolutionizing themselves and thing s, creating something that did not exist before,
precisely in such epochs of revolutionary crisis they anxiously conjure up the spirits
of the past to their service, borrowing from them names, battle slogans, and costumes
in order to present this new scene in world history in time-honoured disguise and
borrowed language. Thus Luther put on the mask of the Apostle Paul, the Revolution
of 1789-1814 draped itself alternately in the guise of the Roman Repub lic and the
Roman Empire, and the Revolution of 1848 knew nothing better to do than to parody ,
now 1789 , now the revolutionary tradition of 1793-95. In like manner , the beginner
who has learned a new language alwa ys translates it back into his mother tongue, but
he assimilates the spirit of the new language and expresses himself freely  in it only
when he moves in it without recalling the old and when he for gets his native tongue.
When we think about this conjuring up of the dead of world history , a salient
difference reveals itself. Camille Desmoulins, Danton, Robespierre, St. Just,