not strip off its mystical veil until it is treated as production by freely assoc iated men,
and is consciously regulated by them in accordance with a settled plan. This, however ,
demands for society a certain material ground-work or set of conditions of existence
which in their turn are the spontane ous product of a long and painful process of
development.
Political Economy has indeed analysed, however incompletely , value and its
magnitude, and has discovered what lies beneath these forms. But it has never once
asked the question why labour is represented by the value of its product and labour
time by the magnit ude of that value. These formulæ, which bear it stamped upon them
in unmist akable letters that they belong to a state of society , in which the process of
production has the mastery over man, instead of being controlled by him, such
formulæ appear to the bourgeois intellect to be as much a self-eviden t necessity
imposed by Nature  as productive labour itself. Hence forms of social production that
preceded the bourgeois form, are treated by the bourgeoisie in much the same way as
the Fathers of the Church treated pre-Christian religions.
To what extent some economists are misled by the Fetishism inherent in commodities,
or by the objectiv e appearance of the social characteristics of labour , is shown,
amongst other ways, by the dull and tedious quarrel over the part played by Nature in
the formation of exchange value. Since exchange value is a definite social  manner of
expressing the amount of labour bestowed upon an object, Nature has no more to do
with it, than it has in fixing the course of exchange.
The mode of production in which the product takes the form of a commodity , or is
produced directly for exchange, is the most general and most embryonic form of
bourgeois producti on. It therefore makes its appearance at an early date in history ,
though not in the same predominating and characteristic manner as now-a-days.
Hence its Fetish character is compar atively easy to be seen through. But when we
come to more concrete forms, even this appearance of simplicity vanishe s. Whence
arose the illusions  of the monetary system? To it gold and silver , when serving as
money , did not represent a social relation between producers, but were natural objects
with stran ge social properties. And modern economy , which looks down  with such
disdain on the monetary system, does not its superstition come out as clear as noon-
day, whenever it treats of capital? How long is it since economy discarded the
physiocratic illusion, that rents grow out of the soil and not out of society?
But not to anticipa te, we will content  ourselves with yet another example relating to
the commodity form. Could commodities themselves speak, they would say: Our use
value may be a thing that interests men. It is no part of us as objects. Wha t, however ,
does belong to us as objects, is our value. Our natural intercourse as commodities
proves it. In the eyes of each other we are nothing but exchange values. Now listen
how those commodities speak through the mouth of the economist.
“Value” – (i.e., exchange value) “is a property of things, riches” – (i.e., use value) “of
man. Value, in this sense, necessarily implies exchanges, riches do not.” “Riches” (use
value) “are the attribute of men, value is the attribute of commodities. A man or a
176community is rich, a pearl or a diamond is valuable...” A pearl or a diamond is
valuable as a pearl or a diamond.
So far no chemist has ever discovered exchange value either in a pearl or a diamond.
The economic discoverers of this chemical element, who by-the-bye lay special claim
to critical acumen, find however that the use value of objects belongs to them
independently of their material proper ties, while their value, on the other hand, forms
a part of them as objects. What confirms them in this view , is the peculiar
circumstance that the use value of objects is realised without exchange, by means of a
direct relation between the objects and man, while, on the other hand, their value is
realised only by exchange, that is, by means of a social process. Who fails here to call
to mind our good friend, Dogberry , who informs neighbour Seacoal, that, “To be a
well-favoured man is the gift of fortune; but reading and writing comes by Nature.”
177Capital Vol. III. Chapter 2. The Rate of
Profit
The general formula of capital is M-C-M’. In other words, a sum of value  is thrown
into circu lation to extract a larger sum out of it. The process which produces this
larger sum is capitalist production. The process that realises it is circulation  of capital.
The capitalist does not produce a commodity for its own sake, nor for the sake of its
use-value, or his personal consumptio n. The product in which the capitalist is really
interested is not the palpable product itself, but the excess value of the product over
the value of the capital consumed by it. The capitalist advances the total capital
without regard to the different roles played by its components in the production of
surplus-value. He advances all these components uniformly , not just to reproduce the
advanced capital, but rather to produce value in excess of it. The only way in which
he can convert the value of his adva nced variable capital into a greater value is by
exchanging it for living labour and exploiting living labour . But he cannot exploit this
labour unless he makes a simultaneous advance of the conditions for perfo rming this
labour , namely means of labour and subjects of labour , machinery and raw materials,
i.e., unless he conv erts a certain amount of value in his possession into the form of
conditions of production; for he is a capitalist and can undertake the process of
exploiting labour only because, being the owner of the conditions of labour , he
confronts the labourer as the owner of only labour -power . As already shown in the
first book , it is precisely the fact that non-workers own the means of production which
turns labourers into wage-workers and non-workers into capitalists.
The capitalist does not care whether it is considered that he advances constant capital
to make a profit out of his variable capital, or that he advances variable capital to
enhance the value of the constant capital; that he invests money in wages to raise the
value of his machin ery and raw mater ials, or that he invests money in machinery and
raw materials to be able to exploit labour . Although it is only the variable portion of
capital which creates surplus-value, it does so only if the other portions, the
conditions of production, are likewise  advanced. Seeing that the capitalist can exploit
labour only by advancing constant capital and that he can turn his constan t capital to
good account only by advancing variable capital, he lumps them all together in his
imagination, and much more so since  the actual rate of his gain is not determined by
its proportion to the variable, but to the total capital, not by the rate of surplus-value,
but by the rate of profit. And the latter , as we shall see, may remain the same and yet
express dif ferent rates of surplus-value.
The costs of the product include all the elements of its value paid by the capitalist or
for which he has thrown an equivalent into production. These costs must be made
good to preserve the capital or to reproduce it in its original magnitude.
The value  contained in a commodit y is equal to the labour -time expended in its
production, and the sum of this labou r consists of paid and unpaid portions. But for
178the capitalist the costs of the commodity consist only of that portion of the labour
materialised in it for which he has paid. The surplus-labour contained in the
commodity costs the capitalist nothin g, although, like the paid portion, it costs the
labourer his labour , and although it creates value and enters into the commodity as a
value-creating elem ent quite like paid labour . The capitalist’ s profit is derived from
the fact that he has something to sell for which he has paid nothing. The surplus-
value, or profit, consists precisely in the excess value of a commodity over its cost-
price, i.e., the excess of the total labour embodied in the commodity over the paid
labour embodied in it. The surplus-v alue, whatever its origin, is thus a surplus over
the advanced total capital. The proportion of this surplus to the total capital is
therefore expressed  by the fraction s/C, in which C stands for total capital. We thus
obtain the rate of pr ofit s/C=s/(c+v), as distinct from the rate of surplus-value s/v .
The rate of surplu s-value measured  against the variable capital is called rate of
surplus-value. The rate of surplus-va lue measured against the total capita l is called
rate of profit. These are two different measurements of the same entity , and owing to
the difference of the two standards of measurement they express different proportions
or relations of this entity .
The transformatio n of surplus-value into profit must be deduced from the
transformation of the rate of surplus-value into the rate of profit, not vice versa. And
in fact it was rate of profit which was the historical point of departure. Surplus-value
and rate of surplus- value are, relatively , the invisible and unknown essence that wants
investigating, while rate of profit and therefore the appearance of surplus-value in the
form of profit are revealed on the surface of the phenomenon.
So far as the individual capitalist is concerned, it is evident that he is only interested
in the relation of the surplus-value , or the excess value at which he sells his
commodities, to the total capital advanced for the production of the commodities,
while the specific relationship and inner connection of this surplus with the various
components of capital fail to interest him, and it is, moreover , rather in his interests to