SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii — the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 4/28  |  CHARS: 70741-94392 of 659348
============================================================

is detailed in 
chapter CXL. According to Honorius, it can be made of copper, silver, 
gold, or hazel wood. Ganell (L.2.f.9) states that Solomon in his “fifth 
104 Which name of course is found in IV.4 and on the Seal of God. SSM L.2.f.13: habere 
gladium vel ensem, in cuius manubrio in sedula munda sit in castratum quartum nomen 
ineffabile quod est 72 literarum, Que sunt iste, H.t.oexoraba ....
105 Baculum lauri vel coruli, (CXXXII.2); virgula coruli, (CXXXIX.2).
106 Illius anni (CXXXII.2).


--- PAGE 40 ---
Introduction
39
book” commanded that it should be made. He adds that it can be made of 
copper, silver, or hazel (“ere, argento, vel avellane”). 
• Wine: Choice or “the finest” wine may be consumed during the ritual of 
calling forth the spirits, to help calm the nerves.107
Spirit thrones
The text refers to the thrones or seats (sedes) of the supernatural beings, such 
as the seat of Samaym, and the seats of Primachia and Apologia (CXXIII.38). 
According to Ganell (L.3.f.3), this is the second circle, placed next to the circle 
of the operator.108
The Rituals
The core ritual takes seventy-two days in the London Honorius, but forty days 
in SSM. Since the Seal of God (also called the Seal of Solomon) is needed in 
the other rituals, its preparation is described in great detail (LII, XCVIII-CI). 
Ganell’s description is much simpler, but the accompanying diagram makes 
the details redundant anyway.
A twenty-day purification comes next, involving attending mass, and 
reciting certain prayers both before and during the service. This is followed 
by twelve days of fasting and prayer; for this stage of the operation, a discreet 
priest is enlisted to help with prayers and services. Near the end of the ritual, 
you prepare a bed surrounded by ashes with divine names written therein. 
This is the stage for critical sleep visions.
The process for calling the spirits commences similarly, followed by a 
four-part ritual: the “invocation,” the “seal and binding,” the “conjuration,” 
and the “placation.”109 Placating involves offering the spirits a “small gift.”110 
This is evidently the pleasing suffumigation offered.111
Note much of the work is performed outside the magic circle, including 
the excitations.112
107 CXXIX.1, CXXXIX.2.
108 On this see also Veenstra 2012 p. 173–175.
109 Mesler 2012 p. 122.
110 Munusculum, (CXIV.7, CXV.16–17, 35, 41).
111 Placatum suffumigium, CXVIII.24.
112 Veenstra 2012 p. 176.


--- PAGE 41 ---
sworn book of honorius
40
Influence
As mentioned above, examples of the Seal of God and its variants are much 
more frequent and widespread than the text itself. The actual text of the Sworn 
Book seems to be little noticed by practitioners. The main legacy seems to have 
come to us in the form of the so-called Heptarchic and Enochian systems of 
magic which originated with John Dee and Edward Kelly. 
In 1582, John Dee, one of the leading scientists and occultists of his age, 
undertook a series of “Mystical Experiments.”113 He quickly became con-
vinced that he was communicating with supernatural creatures. One of the 
first instructions he received was to construct a Seal of God, based on one 
“already perfected” in his books. Dee consulted several manuscripts, one 
of which was apparently Sloane 313.114 Another of his sources was Ganell’s 
Summa, which contains annotations in his hand. With his shrewd eye he 
noticed discrepancies, and consulted the angels to help resolve them. This 
prompted them to reveal an almost totally new version of the Sigillum Dei, 
but with elements from both manuscripts. The design is now widely known, 
with examples on coffee mugs and tee-shirts available.
As one last example of its influence, I think it quite likely that the name 
and reputation of Honorius “of Thebes” led to the creation of an unrelated 
text, the so-called Grimoire of Pope Honorius. Boudet noted the “huge success 
of the Grimoire of Pope Honorius, whose first edition dates from 1629 and is 
still republished regularly to the present, for the use of contemporary magi-
cians.” More than a few times that text has been confused the Sworn Book, 
including individuals making such uninformed assertions as the Grimoire of 
Honorius or even the Grand Grimoire being derived from it.115
113 Peterson 2002, pp. 12, 70.
114 Roberts and Watson, in their 1990 John Dee’s Library Catalogue, pg. 168, identify 
Sloane 313 as being one of Dee’s manuscripts. They give it catalog number DM70, and 
note, “On fol.9 (originally the first leaf, fol.1–8 having been misbound) is [Dee’s ladder 
symbol] and, very faint, ‘Fragmentum Magicum’, which may be in Dee’s hand. At the foot 
is ‘Sum Ben: Jonsonij liber’.”
115 Boudet 2002 p. 870. Owen Davies 2009 pp. 34–35 discusses these later texts.


--- PAGE 42 ---
Introduction
41
Problems with the text
Here is a summary of some of the problems with the text as it has reached us:
• Names frequently have multiple spellings.
• Seals of angels, of the type that can be held in the hand during the rituals, 
are mentioned in the instructions, but never given.
• There are thirteen topics listed in chapter II, but never covered in the text, 
not counting 92 and 93, which are described as intentionally omitted: 36, 
38, 39, 59–62, 76–78, 82, 86, and 87.
• Names of the angels of the months, hours, and decans are never identified.
• Penatur, penantur. In the descriptions of the daemons of the winds, the text 
says these spirits penantur vel requiescunt (“they ??? or they rest”) The first 
word, penantur, (pennor) is uncommon, and generally means “they may 
have feathers (or wings).” This is perhaps not a very satisfactory reading 
of the text however, as Hedegård 2002 p. 50 points out. Manuscript C 
reads ponantur on two occasions (“they may be placed”), and paenantur 
twice, also not a convincing reading. Hedegård with much hesitation 
proposes a Latinized form of Greek πένομαι (“toil”) on the theory that 
it might be based on a Greek source. Another possibility is that it is a 
unique verbal (subjunctive) form of penator (“one who carries provisions”) 
meaning “they may carry provisions.” A slightly more satisfactory reading 
is suggested by the legal maxim Clerici non penantur in officiia “The clergy 
cannot be compelled to serve temporal offices,” which is what I have based 
by translation on.116
Relation to other Solomonic manuscripts
In his prologue, Honorius states that the work is an arrangement of the 
“works of Solomon,” and records the teachings of Solomon with “as much 
116 From Coke, The First Part of the Institutes of the Lawes of England. Or, a Commentarie 
upon Littleton , 1628, 96b, quoted in Peloubet, S. S. A Collection of Legal Maxims in Law 
and Equity, with English Translations. Littleton, Colo: F.B. Rothmann, 1985, pp. 29-30. 
https://books.google.com/books?id=4x5HAQAAMAAJ&pg=PA29&lpg=PA29&dq
=penantur&source=bl&ots=KUr2RvLpWF&sig=bNbj3VD6L2UtYM746S_pT0NiHn
s&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CE4Q6AEwCGoVChMIt-_uu-TJyAIVk_WACh0uwgSq#v=
onepage&q=penantur&f=false retrieved 10/17/2015.


--- PAGE 43 ---
sworn book of honorius
42
exactness as possible.” Solomon is mentioned repeatedly in the text, and is 
quoted repeatedly. In some cases the quotes are otherwise unknown.117 
Nevertheless, Honorius has only a few elements in common with other 
Solomonic magic texts. Aside from the prayers drawn from Ars Notoria, these 
include ink made from blood, a Seal of Solomon, names of God and angels 
(only some well known in Solomonic literature), hazel wand, seals of spirits, 
incense offerings, magic circles, swords, and whistle.
Many elements in Honorius are unknown in other texts: most of the 
names of angels and God are otherwise not known, as are specific design 
details of the wand, swords, whistle, and magic circle. As far as I know, the 
spirit throne being elevated or a depression according to the type of spirit is 
also otherwise unknown.
As mentioned above, another handbook of ritual magic popular in the 
Middle Ages, Thesaurus Spirituum (14th century or older),118 makes use of 
the same seven sacred names as Honorius (IV.14–47, CXXVII.15). These 
appear to derive from Razielis (different sections ascribed to different Bibli-
cal authors, including Solomon.)
There are direct parallels between the Sworn Book and pseudo-Agrippa 
and pseudo-de Abano, but whether they drew on Honorius or some common 
ancestor is unclear.
Other magic texts have detailed instructions for specific practical ben-
efits only briefly mentioned in the text. For example, operations to secure a 
magically-fast horse, or making a banquet appear, are frequent, including the 
Munich handbook published by Kieckhefer.119 This may indicate some level 
of an awareness of these other texts.
Editions
Latin. A critical edition of the Latin text was published in 2002 by Gösta 
Hedegård. Hedegård’s text was largely based on Sloane 3854, which is the 
most complete, most senior, and “least tampered with.” Unfortunately, he did 
not make use of Sloane 3853, which is an important second witness to por-
117 III.3, IV.54, on which see Mesler 2012 p. 119 and 139 n 48.
118 Klaassen 2013 pp. 234–235 n 21.
119 E.g. Kieckhefer 1989 pp. 54, 208; Wellcome MS 110 87v; Rawlinson D 252 73r; 
Sloane 3885.


--- PAGE 44 ---
Introduction
43
tions of the text. Also, as Claire Fanger noted in her 2006 review, some of his 
findings have been superseded due to the considerable amount of scholarly 
activity on the subject. His careful comparison of the text with Ars Notoria, 
for example, has been obsoleted by Véronèse’s 2007 edition of that text.120 In 
another review, Juris Lidaka checked thirteen samples from Hedegård’s edi-
tion, and found “very few major errors.” The only concrete example he gives is 
that 4.1 “diameter” should be “diametrus”—on which I disagree: The manu-
script supports GH’s reading, and the usage is not unknown.121
Boudet also provided a critical edition of much of the text in his 2002 
article “Magie théurgique” etc. His readings vary slightly with Hedegård’s, 
and his critical apparatus is conveniently placed with the text rather than as 
an appendix.
English. Driscoll 1977. The only attempt at publishing any significant por-
tion of the English translation was Daniel Driscoll’s The Sworn Book of Hon-
ourius (sic) the Magician, Heptangle Books, 1977. Unfortunately, Driscoll did 
not make use of the best manuscripts, omitted large portions, misread and 
misplaced angelic names and words from the prayers, and otherwise took 
serious liberties with the text.
Peterson 1998/2009. Edition on CD Rom and http://esotericarchives.
com/juratus/juratus.htm. The earliest version of this covered only the chap-
ters included in the Royal manuscript, but with alternate readings from the 
other manuscripts. This was later supplemented with the rest of the text, and 
has incorporated corrections pretty much continually to this date.
Blanchard, Robert. The supposed translation published by Blanchard 
proves to be entirely dependent on Driscoll, altered superficially to disguise 
the fact, but perpetuating all of his Driscoll’s errors and his artwork.122
This edition
Publishing a new edition is a daunting task, given that “so much of interest 
hangs in the balance around this work.”123 My intent has not been to sum-
120 Fanger 2006 pp. 180–183.
121 Lidaka 2004. Boudet 2002 p. 876 also supports the reading of diameter.
122 Ironically, in promoting his publications, Blanchard wrote “Bad translations taken 
from bad sources mean failure for the practitioner.”
123 Fanger 2006 p. 180.


--- PAGE 45 ---
sworn book of honorius
44
marize all of the recent literature, but to provide a modern translation for 
those unwilling to tackle the difficult medieval Latin. I also wanted to offer 
some corrections and observations suggested by the literature, or by my own 
research.
Editorial principles
I have not tried to reproduce the critical apparatuses of Hedegård 2002 or 
Boudet 2002, but in some cases I supplement those in my footnotes. In the 
case of the magic circle, the text arranged around the diagram was not tran-
scribed, or critical apparatus provided, by either of those publications, so I 
have taken the opportunity of providing it in this edition.
In order to facilitate reference to Hedegård’s critical apparatus, I have 
included his paragraph numbers. For other corrections to his text, see  Appen-
dix I.
Hedegård used italics, and the notations |a- -a|, and ||a- -a|| to indicate where 
LIH and Ars Notoria coincided; since this has been obsoleted by the critical 
edition of Julien Véronèse 2007, I have not tried to maintain the use of those 
notations. Instead, I have indicated the paragraphs of Ars Not. from that edi-
tion, abbreviated JV.
Abbreviations: Abbreviations in the manuscript have generally been 
expanded. 
Chi Rho: The manuscripts generally uses this common practice of abbrevi-
ating the name Iesus Christus with Greek letters ΙΗS ΧΡ (Ιηs Χρ); these 
have been expanded to “Iesus Christus.” Note particularly the frequent use of 
Greek “ΧΡ” or “χρ” for “Christ.” In textual studies this is commonly referred 
to as “chi rho.” Thus “ΧΡus” (abbreviation for “Christus”) looks like Latin 
“Xpus,” Similarly the Greek “ΙΗS” or “ιης,” standing for the Latin “Iesus” 
(“Jesus”) is found throughout the text.124
124 GH expanded this as Ihesus Christus.


--- PAGE 46 ---
Introduction
45
Acknowedgments
I owe thanks to many for their roles in making this book possible. First to 
John Dee for collecting and preserving old manuscripts, the curators of the 
British Library manuscripts department for allowing me access to those man-
uscripts, Universität Kassel Bibliothek for digitizing the Ganell manuscript, 
Carlos Gilly for bringing it to our attention, Damaris Gehr for her pioneering 
work, Leipzig University for digitizing their amazing magical manuscripts; 
the officers of the Societas Magica for their many important contributions, 
and Ioannis Marathakis for his insights and suggestions. Finally I owe great 
thanks once again to Jim Wasserman for his many years of support and 
encouragement.
Abbreviations
_ I use underlining in the footnotes to highlight differences the readings between source 
texts.
++ = text seems to be corrupt
<> = text that should be deleted
[] = text that should be added
[*] Corrected readings are indicated by * in front of the correct form.
{} = Text cannot be read because of physical damage.
A: MS Sloane 3854
B: MS Sloane 313
BoO: Book of Oberon, Harms, Clark, Peterson 2015 
C: MS Sloane 3885
D: MS Sloane 3853
GH: Gösta Hedegård, also his critical edition (2002) 
H: Heptameron, Petrus de Abano 1565
JV: Julien Véronèse 2007 critical edition of Ars Notoria
L: Leipzig Cod. Mag. 16
LIH: Liber Iuratus Honorii
LTA: Liber Trium Animarum, i.e. SSM IV.2.3
R: British Library MS Royal 17Axlii
Sl. London, British Library, Sloane manuscript collection
SSM: Ganell, Summa Sacre Magice, Kassel, Ms. 4o astron. 3.
Summa: Ganell, Summa Sacre Magice, Kassel, Ms. 4o astron. 3.


--- PAGE 48 ---
47
The Sworn Book of Honorius
Liber Iuratus Honorii 


--- PAGE 49 ---
sworn book of honorius
48
Liber Iuratus Honorii
Text
[Prologus]
Cum convenissent maligni spiritus demonia in cordibus hominum 
intonantes, cogitantes utilitatem fragilitatis humane +posse suo corrum-
pere et+ totam mundi machinam volentes suis viribus superare, () ypocri-
sim cum invidia seminantes, pontiﬁces et prelatos in superbia radicantes, 
dominum papam cum cardinalibus in unum venire fecerunt, dicentes 
adinvicem que secuntur: 
() “Salus, quam dedit Dominus plebi sue, modo per magos et nigro-
manticos in dampnacionem convertitur cuiuscumque. () Nam et ipsi 
magi potu diabolico inebriati et eciam excecati contra statuta sancte matris 
ecclesie procedentes ac preceptum Dominicum transgredientes, sic dicens: 
() ‘Non temptabis Dominum Deum tuum’ set ‘ei soli servies,’ ipsi Deo sac-
riﬁcium abnegando et temptando nomina creatoris, demones invocando 
et eis sacriﬁcia tribuendo, quod est contra baptismatis sacri preceptum, () 
nam ibi dicitur:
‘Abrenuncio Sathane et omnibus pompis eius;’ qui non tantum pom-
pas et opera Sathane prosecuntur set universum populum in suis erroribus 
provocaverunt, () cum suis miriﬁcis illusionibus attrahentes ignorantes 
pro huiusmodi anime et corporis dampnacionem optinere, et cum hoc 
nullum propositum aliud cogitantes, propter quod oportet omnes alias 
sciencias deperire.
() Dignum est ergo radicem mortis huius stipitis penitus exstirpare 
cum cultoribus seminum huius artis.” 
() Ipsi vero Diabolo inspirante moti invidia et cupiditate sub simili-
tudine veritatis falsitatem publicantes, quod falsum est dicere et absur-
dum, quia virum iniqum et immundum impossibile est per artem veraciter 
operari, () nec spiritibus aliquibus homo obligatur, set ipsi inviti cogun-
tur mundatis hominibus respondere et sua beneplacita penitus adimplere. 
() Tamen nullo nostrum volente eis artis principia nec causam ostendere 
veritatis, ob hoc nos et artem magicam morti suo iudicio tradiderunt. 


--- PAGE 50 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
49
The Sworn Book of Honorius
Translation
[Prologue]
When evil spirits had convened, intending to invoke demons into the hearts 
of men, thinking it possible to use human frailty <wishing> to spoil <their> 
and overcome the whole world order by force, (2) planting the seeds of hypoc-
risy and hatred, so that arrogance takes root in the bishops and prelates, they 
caused the Pope and cardinals to gather together, who said to each other as 
follows: 
(3) “The salvation which the Lord has given to his people, has now been 
turned to their damnation, through magic and nigromancy. (4) For even the 
magicians themselves have intoxicated themselves with the devilish drink, 
and even blinded against the holy statutes of the mother Church, and trans-
gressed against the Lord’s teachings which say: (5) ‘You shall not test the Lord 
your God’;1 but ‘you shall serve him alone,’2 thus they deny the sacrifice due 
to God himself, and testing the names of the Creator, invoking demons, and 
giving them sacrifices, contrary to their baptismal vows, (6) for there it is said:
‘I renounce Satan and all his pomp;’ whereby not only do these (magi-
cians) pursue the pomp and works of Satan, but they also draw all people into 
his errors (7) with their amazing illusions, thereby attracting the ignorant to 
the damnation of their bodies and souls, and they thinking this for no other 
reason, than that they ought to obliterate all other knowledge.
(8) It is therefore appropriate to root out this root of death, along with 
those who cultivate the seeds of this art.”
(9) So they, inspired by the Devil, and moved by hatred and greed, pub-
lished falsehood disguised as truth, saying things which are false and absurd, 
because it is impossible that a wicked and impure man can operate truly in 
this art, (10) nor is a person bound to any spirits, but spirits are forced against 
their wills to answer pure men, and to thoroughly fulfill their good pleasures. 
(11) Nevertheless, none of us was willing to reveal the principles nor causes of 
this truth, because they had handed down a judgment of death to us and this 
art of magic.
1 Deut. 6:16
2 Deut. 6:13


--- PAGE 51 ---
sworn book of honorius
50
(12) Nos autem permissione divina illud iudicium prescientes, scien-
tes eciam, quod inde possent accidere multa mala, (13) quoniam impossi-
bile erat nos congregacionis populi corporis viribus manus evadere, nisi a 
spiritibus cepissemus auxilium, dubitantes inde maius periculum evenire, 
(14) quoniam hostilis demonum potencia per precepta nostra sola hora 
eos integre destruxisset, ob hoc unum consilium fecimus magistrorum 
generale, (15) in quo ex 89 magistris a Neapoli, Athenis et Tholeto con-
gregatis elegimus unum nomine Honorium, filium Euclidis, magistrum 
Thebarum, ubi ars illa tunc legebatur, ut deberet super predictis pro nobis 
omnibus operari.
(16) Qui consulente angelo Hocrohel nomine 7 volumina artis magice 
deffloravit nobis florem accipiens et aliis cortices dimittendo. (17) De qui-
bus voluminibus subtraxit 93 capitula cum omnibus virtutibus huius artis, 
que sub verbis brevibus continentur, (18) de quibus libellum composuit, 
quem sacrum sive iuratum vocamus hac de causa, quoniam 100 sacra Dei 
nomina sunt materia huius libri; (19) et ideo sacrum, quasi actus ex sacris, 
vel quod per istum exeunt sacra, vel quod ab angelis est sacratus, et quia 
cum hoc angelus Hocrohel eum sacratum a Domino appellavit. 
(20) Tunc placatis principibus et prelatis contentis de combustione 
fabularum et destruccione scolarum—et credebant hanc artem penitus 
destruxisse—nos moti furore et iracundia ista fecimus iuramenta:
(21) Primo, quod nulli dabitur iste liber, donec magister fuerit in extre-
mis; et quod nisi tribus tantum copietur; et quod nulli dabitur mulieri nec 
homini nisi maturo actu tantum et probissimo ac fideli, (22) et qui cog-
noverit per annum mores et condiciones; et quod de cetero non destruetur 
sed danti restituetur aut eius successoribus;
(23) et quod, si non inveniatur homo sufficiens, cui liber dari debeat, 
quod magister secum faciat in tumulo sepeliri executores per iuramenta 
fortissima constringendo (24) vel ipsum alicubi in vita sua sepeliat munde 


--- PAGE 52 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
51
(12) But we with divine permission, knowing about that judgment before-
hand, knowing also that it would be the cause of great evils, (13) because it was 
impossible for us to evade the hands of a large body of people, except through 
the help of spirits we had captured, and fearing that a greater danger would 
result, (14) because the hostile force of the demons at our command would 
have destroyed them entirely in only an hour, on account of this we convened 
a general council of masters, (15) from which out of 89 masters gathered from 
Naples, Athens, and Toledo, we selected one named Honorius, son of Euclid, 
master of Thebes, where that art at the time was established, in order that he 
would labor on our behalf to this end.
(16) And he, with the consulting angel Hocrohel, named seven books of 
the magic art, plucking for us the flower and dismissing all the rest as bark. 
(17) From those books he extracted ninety-three chapters with all the worth 
of this art, which are succinctly captured, (18) from which he composed the 
short book which we call “Sacred” or “Sworn,” so-called because the hundred 
sacred names of God are included in this book; (19) and therefore “Sacred” as 
it acts through the sacred, or because sacred things emerge from it, or because 
it is consecrated through the angels, and because the angel Hocrohel called it 
consecrated before the Lord.
[The Oath]
(20) Then the princes and prelates (secular and church authorities), con-
tented with the burning of fables and the destruction of schools, believed this 
art to be utterly destroyed. We, being moved by their madness and rage, have 
made these oaths: 
✠  (21) First, that nobody should be given this book, unless the master is 
at the point of death;
✠  [2] And that he should provide himself no more than three; 
✠  [3] And that it will be given to no woman, nor to a man unless he is 
mature, and most upright and faithful, (22) both of which should be assessed 
by observing his mannerisms throughout an entire year;
✠  [4] And that otherwise it should not be destroyed, but returned to 
him or to his successors; 
✠  (23) [5] And that, if no one sufficient is found to whom the book might 
be given, that the master must bind his executors with the strongest oaths to 


