SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii ŌĆö the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 20/28  |  CHARS: 453654-478015 of 659348
============================================================

re small, thin, choleric, and very ugly in appearance, 
their color is like copper that has been blackened a little by fire. They have 
horns like those of a stag, and nails like a griffin. (5) They howl like mad bulls. 
Their movement is somewhat like the burning of part of their true appear-
ance.238 The sign is that lightning and thunder will be seen to fall near the 
circle when they are invoked. 
237 Cp. CVII.
238 Compare OP4: Apparebunt longo corpore, cholerico, et aspectum turpissimo: 


--- PAGE 233 ---
sworn book of honorius
232
CXXII De spiritibus septemtrionalibus 
Septemtrionales sunt isti: Maymon rex, Albunalich, Assaibi, Haibal-
idech, Yas’¼éa, quibus omnes alii demones regionis subduntur, et sunt sub-
diti Saturno et vento eius, qui A’¼Ćricus dicitur. (’£▓) Et excitantes eum sunt 
isti ’£│: Mextyura, Alcybany, Al’¼éas, et habent hos ’£Ą demones et eorum sub-
ditos congregare, dispergere, constringere ac in loco proprio ligare. (’£│) Sua 
natura est seminare discordias, odia generare, malas cogitaciones, furta et 
avaricias, dare cum libito plumbum, quemlibet inter’¼ücere et membrorum 
quodlibet destruere.
(’£┤) Sua corpora sunt longa et gracilia, cum ira et rancore plena. Habent 
vultus ’£┤, unum a parte anteriori et alterum a parte posteriori, in quibus 
sunt duo rostra ampla et longa ad mensuram trium pedum, (’£Ą) et videntur 
duos serpentes devorare, et in duobus genibus alios duos, qui cum merore 
maximo ’¼éere videntur, et sunt in colore nigra et lucencia sicut speculum 
furbitum. (’£Č) Motus eorum est ventorum agitacio cum apparencia terre-
motus. Signum eorum est, quod terra alba nive tecta videbitur invocanti. 
CXXIII 
Cum igitur de perfecte bonis et malis diximus, de mediocribus hinc dica-
mus. (’£▓) Set est advertendum, quod operans non debet operari in istis nec 
pro perfecte bono nec pro perfecte malo. (’£│) Set in rebus mobilibus sicut in 
itinere, in revocacione et subtraccione et similibus operantur. 


--- PAGE 234 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
233
CXXII. Concerning the Spirits of the North.239
The Northern ones are these: Maymon the king, Albunalich, Assaibi, 
Haibalidech, and Yasfla, and all other daemons of the region are placed 
under these, and they are subordinate to Saturn and its wind, which is called 
Africus (or the ŌĆ£southwest windŌĆØ). (2) And raising it up are these three: Mex-
tyura, Alcybany, Alflas, and they have these five daemons and their subor-
dinates to congregate, disperse, constrain, and bind to their proper place. (3) 
Their nature is240 to sow discord, create hatred, evil thoughts, theft, and greed; 
they give lead if desired, kill anyone, and destroy limbs. 
(4) Their bodies241 are long and slender, full of wrath and anger. They 
have four faces: one is forward, another behind, which have two large and 
long beaks measuring three feet, (5) which can be seen devouring two ser-
pents. The other two faces are on the two knees, which appear to be crying 
with most great mourning, and they are black in color, and shining like a 
burnished mirror. (6) Their movement is the moving of the wind with the 
appearance of an earthquake. Their sign is that the ground will appear to be 
white, covered with snow when they are invoked. 
CXXIII. [Concerning the intermediate spirits.]
Having treated of the spirits which are either fully good or fully evil, we will 
now talk about the  intermediate ones (2) But it should be noted in operating 
with them, that their actions are neither fully for good nor fully for evil. (3) 
But they operate in movable things such as in journeys, in the recalling and 
withdrawing and similar things.  
colore subfusto, et quasi ruffo, cornibus fere ceruinis, et unguibus griphi: mugiunt instar 
taurorum insanorum. Motus eorum fit quasi instar ignis comburientis. Signum afferent 
in specie, fulgur et tonitru iuxta circulum. (ŌĆ£They appear in a tall body, choleric, a filthy 
countenance, of color brown, swarthy or red, having horns like Harts horns, and gryphonŌĆÖs 
claws, bellowing like wild Bulls. Their Motion is like fire burning; their sign Thunder and 
Lightning about the Circle.ŌĆØ)
239 Cp. CV, spirits of Saturn.
240 This description is almost identical to that found in de Abano, ŌĆ£considerations of 
Saturday.ŌĆØ
241 Cp. OP4.5a.


--- PAGE 235 ---
sworn book of honorius
234
CXXIV De spiritibus inter orientem et meridiem 
Dicamus igitur, quod inter orientem et meridiem est una regio, que consol 
appellatur, et sunt in ea angeli, qui dicuntur equinocciales, et sunt isti ’£┤: (’£▓) 
Formione rex, Guth, Maguth, Gutrhyn eius ministri, quibus omnes alii 
regionis illius demones subduntur, et sunt subditi Iovi et ventis eius, qui 
boreas et subsolanus dicuntur. (’£│) Et excitantes eos sunt isti ’£Ą: Harit, Iesse, 
Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob, et habent hos ’£┤ demones et eorum subditos exci-
tare, congregare, constringere, dispergere ac in loco proprio ligare. (’£┤) 
Sua natura est amicicias et benivolencias tribuere mulierum non carnali 
copula. Generant leticias, gaudia, lites paci’¼ücant, mitigant inimicos, san-
ant in’¼ürmos, in’¼ürmant sanos, auferunt vel inferunt dominium cuicumque.
(’£Ą) Sua corpora sunt magna, tam sanguinea quam colerica, medie stat-
ure, trementissima in motu, visu mitissima, eloquio blanda, falsa in motu, 
vultus eorum in forma benivolus, color eorum sicut es non burnitum 
colore ’¼éamme ignis depictum. (’£Č) Motus eorum est choruscacio cum toni-
truo. Signum eorum est, quod invocans, ut sibi videbitur, [videbit] iuxta 
circulum homines a leonibus devorari. 
CXXV De spiritibus inter austrum et occidentem 
Alii sunt inter austrum et occidentem, et sua regio est nogahem. (’£▓) Qui 
sunt isti: Sarabocres rex, Nassar, Cynassa eius ministri, quibus omnes alii 
demones regionis obediunt et subduntur, et sunt subditi Veneri et ven-


--- PAGE 236 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
235
CXXIV. Concerning the Spirits between  
the East and the South. 
We therefore declare, that between the east and south is a single region, which 
is called ŌĆ£ConsolŌĆØ,242 and in it are angels, which are called ŌĆ£equinoctialŌĆØ, and 
they are these four: (2) Formione the king, and his ministers Guth, Maguth, 
and Gutrhyn [*Guthryn],243 and all other daemons of this region are placed 
under these, and they are subordinate to Jupiter and its winds, which are 
called Borean (ŌĆ£NortherlyŌĆØ) and Subsolar (ŌĆ£EasterlyŌĆØ). (3) And raising them 
up (the winds) are these five: Harit, Iesse, Ryon, Nesaph, and Naadob, and 
these have four daemons and their subordinates to raise them up, gather them, 
disperse them, and bind them to their proper place. (4) Their nature is to 
grant friendship and favor of women, but not carnal relations. They engender 
gladness and joy, settle lawsuits (or quarrels) peacefully, make enemies mild, 
cure the sick, sicken the healthy, and they steal away or obtain ownership of 
anything. 
(5) Their bodies are large, as much sanguine as choleric, of medium stat-
ure, very jittery, appearing very mild, their manner of speaking flattering, false 
in the motion. Their faces have a kindly appearance. Their color is like they are 
painted with flames of fire, not burnished. (6) Their movement is like flashing 
with thunder. Their sign is, when invoked, lions will be seen devouring men 
near the circle.244
CXXV. Concerning the Spirits between the South and the West.
Others are between the south and the west, and their area is Nogahem, (2) 
which are these: Sarabocres the king, Nassar, and Cynassa his ministers, 
with which all other daemons of the area obey and are subjugated, and they 
242 SSM: Cosol; Leipzig: Casol.
243 Spelled Guthryn or Guthrin all other passages. SSM: Gutryn.
244 OP4: Apparent corpore sanguineo et cholerico, mediae staturae, horribili motu, 
visu mitissimo, blando colloquio, colore ferrugineo. Motus eorum, est coruscatio, cum 
tonitru. Signum eorum, apparebunt iuxta circulum homines, qui in specie a leonibus 
devorabuntur. Formae autem particulares sunt: (ŌĆ£The spirits of Jupiter do appear with a 
body sanguine and choleric, of a middle stature, with a horrible fearful motion; but with 
a middle countenance, a gentle speech, and of the color of iron. The motion of them is 
flashings of lightning and thunder; their sign is, there will appear men about the circle, 
who shall seem to be devoured of lions.ŌĆØ)


--- PAGE 237 ---
sworn book of honorius
236
tis eius, qui sunt subsolanus et zephirus. (’£│) Et excitantes eos sunt isti ’£┤: 
Cambores <rex>, Trachatat, Nassar, Naassa, et habent hos tres demones 
excitare, congregare, dispergere, constringere ac in loco proprio ligare. (’£┤) 
Et eorum natura est dare argentum, in quo est impressio signata, et stag-
num ad libitum hominis calefacere, luxuriam excitare, inimicos per luxu-
riam concordare, ut matrimonium ostendit, (’£Ą) constringere homines in 
amorem mulierum et ipsas ad hominum voluntates constringi, homines 
in’¼ürmare vel sanare et facere omnia, que moventur. 
(’£Č) Sua corpora sunt medie stature, pulcra, dulcia et iocosa, color 
eorum sicut nix insuper deaurata, motus eorum sicut stella clarissima, sig-
num eorum, quod puelle extra circulum ludere et ipsum vocare videbitur 
invocanti. 
CXXVI De spiritibus inter occidentem et septemtrionem
Alii sunt inter occidentem et septemtrionem, et sua regio est frigicap. (’£▓) 
Qui sunt isti ’£Ą: Abaa rex, Hyici, Quyron, Zach, Eladeb eius ministri, qui-
bus omnes alii illius regionis demones obediunt et subduntur, et sunt sub-
diti Mercurio et ventis eius, qui zephirus et A’¼Ćricus dicuntur. (’£│) Et exci-
tantes eos sunt isti ’£┤: Zobha <rex>, Drohas, Palas, Zambas, et habent hos 
’£Ą demones excitare, congregare, dispergere, constringere ac in loco proprio 
ligare. (’£┤) Natura eorum est omnia metalla de mundo, quecumque fuerint, 
literata vel sculpta cum auro et argento ad libitum dare, omnia preterita, 
presencia et futura terrena revelare, (’£Ą) iudices placare in placito, victo-
riam dare, experimenta et omnes sciencias destructas recti’¼ücare et reedi’¼ü-
care et eciam docere, (’£Č) corpora eciam ex elementis mixta convertibiliter 
unum in aliud transmutare et eciam elementa, senem iuvenem facere et 
e contrario, dare in’¼ürmitatem quamlibet vel eciam sanitatem, si placeat 
invocanti, (’£Ę) pauperes sublimare, sublimes opprimere, dignitates dare vel 
auferre cuicumque, spiritus ligare, ad tempus inclusum impedire, seraturas 
aperire, trans’¼üguraciones facere. (’£Ė) Et isti possunt omnes operaciones ali-
orum facere, set hoc non ex perfecta potencia vel virtute set sciencia bene. 


--- PAGE 238 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
237
are subordinate to Venus and its winds, which are easterly and westerly. (3) 
And there are four spirits which raise them up: Cambores, Trachatat, Nas-
sar, Naassa, and they have those three daemons to raise up, bring together, 
disperse, constrain, and bind them in their own place. (4) And their nature 
is to give silver, in which the sign is impressed, and tin, for arousing human 
desire, to cause luxury, to bring harmony to enemies through luxury, as mar-
riage shows, (5) to bind men in love of women, and bind women to the wills 
of men, to sicken or cure people, and to make all things which are moved. 
(6) Their bodies are medium in stature, pretty, pleasant, and merry. Their 
color is like snow over gilding. Their movements are like the clearest star. 
Their sign of their presence is that when invoked, a girl will be seen playing 
outside the circle, and calling to you.
CXXVI. Concerning the Spirits between  
the West and the North.
Others are between the west and the north, and their area is Frigicap. (2) 
Which are five: Abaa the king, and Hyici, Quyron, Zach, Eladeb his min-
isters, whom all other daemons of the area obey and are subject to, and they 
are subject to Mercury and his wind, which is the west wind (Zephyr), and 
they are called African.245 (3) And raising them up there are these four: Zobha 
<the king>, Drohas, Palas, Zambas, and they have five daemons to raise up, 
congregate, disperse, constrain, and bind them in their own place. (4) Their 
nature is to give all metals from the earth, whichever exist, lettered or sculpted 
with gold and silver as desired, to reveal all earthly things pasts, present, and 
future, (5) to appease judges in a plea, to give victory, to recover and recon-
struct experiments and all destroyed knowledge, and also to teach them, (6) 
also to transmute bodies out of the mixed elements changeably, one into the 
other, and also the elements, to make an old person young and vice versa, to 
infect someone with any kind of sickness, and also to make them healthy, if 
they are placated when invoked, (7) to raise up poor men, bring down the high 
and mighty, to give dignities to whomever, or take them away, to bind spirits, 
to hinder imprisonment for a time, to open locks, and to make transfigura-
tions. (8) And these same spirits are able to accomplish all other operations, 
however not with perfect power or virtue, but with sufficient knowledge. 
245 Africus means either the southwest wind, or from Africa.


--- PAGE 239 ---
sworn book of honorius
238
(’£╣) Sua corpora sunt medie stature, frigida, humida, veneranda, pulcra, 
rauca in eloquio, humanam formam habencia ad modum armigeri compti 
et cucufati, color eorum sicut nubes clara, motus eorum sicut nubes argen-
tea. (’£▒’£░) Signum est, quod horripilacionem tribuunt invocanti. Et isti pos-
sunt indi’¼Ćerenter ubicumque vocari. 
CXXVII Finita divisione angelorum et spirituum  
incipit modus operandi in eis. 
Si ergo de istis aliquis voluerit operari, sibi primo districte precipimus, (’£▓) 
ut peroptime mundetur, sicut diximus in predictis, donec venerit ad diem 
’£▒’£┤am, in qua die convenit ieiunare. (’£│) Tunc in ea recipiat corpus Christi 
dicendo ’£▒’£╣, ’£▓’£░, et cum missa de sancto Spiritu, ut diximus, igitur celebra-
tur, sacerdos tenendo corpus Christi, antequam gentibus ostendatur, petat 
pro operante sic dicens:
(’£┤) O’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
ŌĆ£Domine Iesu Christe, ’¼üli Dei vivi, quem credo ’¼ürmiter hominem et Deum 
et iudicem meum venturum, peto te in hoc articulo in virtute istius sac-
ramenti tui, (’£Ą) ut talis N ex dono tuo ac tua voluntate sine dampnacione 
corporis et anime sibi spiritus N in omnibus subiciat, ut apparere, per’¼ü-
cere, custodire, respondere eos ad omnia precepta constringat, ut sperat 
et desiderat. Amen.ŌĆØ 
(’£Č) Tunc audito completorio, ut dictum est, de ecclesia recedat dicens 
’£▒’£Ę, donec veniat ad locum, in quo debet ’¼üeri circulus. Tunc locum benedi-
cat dicens ’£▒’£Ą. (’£Ę) Hoc facto protrahat circulum ’£╣ pedum dicens ’£▒’£Ė, in quo 
duos circulos protrahat, quorum unus distet ab alio per unum pedem, 
inter quos scribes nomina angelorum diei et hore, mensis, temporis, faciei 
dicendo:


--- PAGE 240 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
239
(9) Their bodies are of medium stature, cold, humid, venerable, attrac-
tive, and their manner of speaking is hoarse. They have human form, bear-
ing arms and hooded. Their color is like a bright cloud. Their movements are 
like a silvery cloud. (10) Their sign is that your hair will bristle when they are 
invoked. And they can be called in any place equally.246
CXXVII. End of the divisions of the angels and spirits, and 
beginning of the manner of working with them. 
If therefore anybody wishes to operate with those spirits, we must first warn 
him strictly (2) that he must be thoroughly purified, as we have said in the 
preceding, until he comes to the fourteenth day, on which day he must begin 
his fast. (3) Then when the mass of the Holy Spirit is being said or celebrated, 
when the operator is receiving the body of Christ (Eucharist), he should say 
prayers 19 and 20 (LXXVIIŌĆōLXXIX), as we have said, when the priest is 
holding up the body of Christ (i.e. the wafer), to reveal it to the congregation, 
he should pray on behalf of the operator, saying thus:
(4) Prayer.
ŌĆ£O Lord Jesus Christ, son of the living God, whom I truly believe is man and 
God, and my judge soon to come, I beg you in this critical moment, by the 
power of your sacraments, (5) in order that such N. by your gift and by your 
will, without condemnation of body and soul that the spirit N. may make 
himself subject in all things, that he may constrain them to appear, to com-
plete, to guard, to answer to all orders that he hopes and desires. Amen.ŌĆØ
(6) Then having heard the evening prayer service (Compline), as said, 
retire from the church, saying 17, until you come to the place where the circle 
has been made. Then bless the place saying 15. (7) With this done, he should 
draw a circle of nine feet across, saying 18, in which he should draw two circles, 
where the first is one foot away from the other, between which you should 
write the names of the angels of the day and hour, of the month, of the time, 
and of the aspect,247 saying: 
246 Cp H p. 146ŌĆō7.
247 Aspect (face): i.e. decan.


--- PAGE 241 ---
sworn book of honorius
240
(’£Ė) ŌĆ£O vos angeli sancti et potentes, sitis michi in hoc opere adiutores.ŌĆØ
(’£╣) Tunc protrahes infra istos duos circulos eptagonum communem 
omnibus invocacionibus aptum, cuius forma cum parcium suarum dimen-
cionibus et di’¼ānicionibus subsequitur inferius in ’¼ügura.


--- PAGE 242 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
241
(8) ŌĆ£O you holy and powerful angels, may you be my assistants in this 
work.ŌĆØ
(9) Then draw within those two circles a regular heptagon,248 suitable for 
all invocations, the form of which with its parts, dimension, and definitions, 
is shown in the figure above.249
248 The drawings in Sl. 3854 amd Sl. 313 do not resemble heptagons, but other exemplars 
do, e.g. 3853 150v, and SSM L.3.f.29. Leipzig Cod. Mag. 16 p. 112 is similar to Sl. 3854.
249 Figure not found in C or R. B shows North occupying 90 degrees. D and SSM show 
seven equal segments. L shows the West as occupying 90 degrees. SSM text has slight 
variations in the order and especially in the names. See Appendix II.


--- PAGE 243 ---
sworn book of honorius
242
(’£▒’£░) Nota, quod operans debet esse diligens, ut addat ista nomina aliis 
nominibus, quia durum est homini ignoranti virtutes spirituum et eorum 
malicias cum eis sine municione maxima aliqualiter habitare, (’£▒’£▒) et assim-
ilatur illi, qui vult debellare militem sagacem et ignorat arma eius et quis 
miles et que virtus militis, quem debellat. (’£▒’£▓) Bene igitur sibi caveat, quia 
ingenium viribus prevalet, et ideo oportet ipsum esse sagacissimum in suo 
circulo faciendo, quia ibi iacet tuicio operantis. 
(’£▒’£│) Primo sic aptetur locus, quod terra sit plana et equa, nec sint 
ibi lapides aut herbe, et quando eum protraxerit, aerem supra se duobus 
diametris ubicumque signet dicens: (’£▒’£┤) ŌĆ£Signum Salomonis ad salvacio-
nem et defensionem pono supra me, ut sit michi proteccio a facie inimici. 
In nomine Patris et Filii et Spiritus sancti. Amen.ŌĆØ (’£▒’£Ą) Sic tuo completo 
circulo exi et extra eum scribe in terra vel in cedulis ’£Ę nomina creatoris, 
que sunt L[a]ialy, Lialg, Veham, Yalgal, Narath, Libarre, Libares, nec plus 
facies in hac nocte.
Oriens calida37 et humida38 in qua dominantur angeli solis / boon ysi-
cres39 / ysicres boon 
Consol40 in qua dominantur angeli iovis, ca[lido], mixta humido sicco41 
/ Zebedey Uriel42 / Uriel Zebedei. 
Meridies in qua dominantur angeli martis ignea cal[ida] et sicca / Eloy 
Karathiel / Karathiel Eloy43 
Nogahem44 in qua dominantur angeli ueneris aerea45 ca[lida] et 
hu[midi] feminea / ienomei Uriel / Uriel ienomei46 
Occidens frigida et hu[mida] in qua dominantur angli lune aquea fem-
inea47 / theos Hocroel48 / Hocroel theos 
’£│’£Ę Calida: SSM: pars calida
’£│’£Ė Humida: SSM adds: masculina
’£│’£╣ boon ysicres: SSM: Beon ysystres
’£┤’£░ Consol: SSM calls this cosol throughout the manuscript.
’£┤’£▒ Calido mixta humino sicco: B: mixta cum hu. SSM: mixta calida et sicca
’£┤’£▓ Zebedey Uriel: SSM:  Zebedye, Vuel
’£┤’£│ Eloy Karathiel / Karathiel Eloy: B: elothi karathi / karathi elothi. SSM: Eloy barachiel / 
barachyel Eloy
’£┤’£┤ Nogahem: B, D: Nogaham. SSM: Nogaem
’£┤’£Ą Aerea: D: aerei
’£┤’£Č ienomei Uriel / Uriel ienomei: SSM:  Genonem, Uryel / Uriel, genonem
’£┤’£Ę Feminea: D: semina
’£┤’£Ė Hocroel: B: Ocrohel; D: Hocrohel. SSM: atrohel


--- PAGE 244 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
243
(10) NOTE: You must be very careful while working, that you add those 
names to the other names,250 because it is hard for a person not knowing the 
powers of the spirits and their malice, without the greatest fortification to 
abide with them somehow, (11) and it is like someone who seeks to wage war 
with a shrewd knight, and disregards his weapons, and who the knight is, 
and what are the strengths of the knight with whom he wages war. (12) It is 
well therefore to be cautious, because the nature of the strengths prevail, and 
therefore it is necessary to be very shrewd when making the circle, because 
therein lies the defense of the operator.
(13) First you must prepare the place thus, for the earth should be flat and 
level, and free from stones or vegetation, and when it has been drawn, mark 
the air above yourself to two diameters every way, saying: (14) ŌĆ£I put the Seal 
of Solomon over me for salvation and defense, in order that it protect me in 
the face of the enemy. In the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy 
Spirit. Amen.ŌĆØ (15) Thus with your circle complete, exit and write outside in 
the earth or on small pieces of paper, the seven names of the creator, which are 
L[a]ialy, Lialg, Veham, Yalgal, Narath, Libarre, Libares,251 and nothing 
more is accomplished this night.
[Text of Circle reads as follows:] 
East, warm and moist,252 where the angels of the Sun dominate / 
Boon Ysicres / Ysicres Boon253
Consol,254 where the angels of Jupiter dominate, warm mixed moist 
dry / Zebedey Uriel / Uriel Zebedei
South in which the angels of Mars, fiery, hot and dry, dominate / 
Eloy Karathiel / Karathiel Eloy
Nogahem, where dominate the angels of Venus, airy, warm, and 
feminine / Ienomei Uriel / Uriel Ienomei
West cold and moist, where the angels of the Moon dominate, 
watery feminine / Theos Hocroel / Hocroel Theos 
250 That is, to add the names of God, such as ŌĆ£TheosŌĆØ and ŌĆ£Sother,ŌĆØ to that of the 
appropriate angels of the day etc.
251 SSM: Layaly, lyalg, vehem, yalgal, narach, lybarre, lybares. Compare the Seal of God. 
Compare also Wellcome 110, fol. 45v. 
252 SSM adds: masculine.
253 Boon: SSM reads ŌĆ£beon.ŌĆØ This name doesnŌĆÖt appear elsewhere in the text.
254 This text is included in the diagram of the circle, and not part of the text.


--- PAGE 245 ---
sworn book of honorius
244
frigicap frigida et hu[mida] masculina in qua dominantur angeli mer-
curii / Sother Vihel49 / Vihel Sother 
Pars50 septemtrionalis in qua dominantur angeli Saturni terrea frigida 
et sicca / Christus Lanciel / Lanciel Christus51
CXXVIII Secunda dies 
In crastino, dum matutinam, primam, terciam, missam, meridiem, nonam, 
vesperas et completorium audieris, venies ad circulum dicendo 17. (2) Tunc 
habeas thus et thuribulum, in quo sint prune, et ponas thus super prunas 
et suffumiges circulum dicens 1 et 2 incipiens ab oriente in occidentem, a 
meridie in septemtrionem, tunc a consol in noghahem et a noghahem in 
frigicap, et postea celum et terram, et ita ter facies. (3) Set primo debent 7 
predicta nomina deleri. Hoc facto suffumigando circulum, ventos novies 
taliter excitabis. 
(4) Incipit excitacionis ventorum primus circulus 
incipiens in oriente et terminans in meridie. 
(5) ŌĆ£Baxhatau, Gahatus, Caudes, Yarabal, Harit, Iesse, Rion, Nesaph, 
Naadob, Attraurbiabilis, Yaconaababur, Carmeal, Ynial, Prohathophas, 
Cambores, Trachatat, Nassar, (6) Naassa, Hebethel, Amocap, Oylol, Mylau, 
Abucaba, Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Sambas, Mextyura, Alcybany, Alflas, ego 
vos invoco, ut meis sitis prom[p]ti52 peticionibus et preceptis. Summa Dei 
potencia vos obedire constringatŌĆÖ. 
(’£Ę) Secundus circulus incipiens in meridie et terminans in occidente 
(8) ŌĆ£Attraurbiabilis, Y[a]conaababur, Carmeal, Innyal, Proha-
thophas, Cambores, Trachatat, Nassar, Naassa, Hebethel, Amocap, 
Oylol, Mylau, Abuchaba, Zobha, (9) Drohas, Palas, Sambas, Mexty-
ura, Alcibany, Alflas, Baxatau, Gahatus, [Caudes, Yarabal, Harit], Iesse, 
Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob, angeli Domini vos excitent, qui vos venire 
constringant.ŌĆØ
49 Vihel: D: Viel. SSM: Vyel
50 Pars: D and SSM omit.
51 Christus Lanciel / Lanciel Christus: D: Christus Lancihel / Lancihel Christus. SSM: 
Christus, lancyel, Christus / Lancyel, Christus / lancyel (!)
52 Promti: *Prompti. Compare CXXIX 9 and 14 and SSM L.3.f.30.


