SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii ŌĆö the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 14/28  |  CHARS: 309380-334380 of 659348
============================================================

n. malaparos. 
malapatas. helatay. helahenay. methay. meray.
LXXXVIII O’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» L’ØĪ’Ø┤’Ø®’Ø«’ØĪ
Pie Deus, misericors Deus, clemens Deus omnipotens omnia dans, fac 
michi credenti hodie omnia possibilia et adiuva hodie incredulitatem 
meam et miserere mei hodie, (’£▓) sicut misertus es Ade penitenti, qui ei 
subitaneam per omnipotencie tue misericordiam multarum virtutum 
contulisti graciam. (’£│) Confer michi hodie per omnipotencie tue mise-
ricordiam graciam, quam desidero, ut in magni’¼ücencia operum tuorum 


--- PAGE 162 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
161
illuminate my mind (6) and gird my loins with the strength of your stability, 
and give the staff of your comfort into my right hand, and may you wash me 
along with those who will be washed in your drops, (7) and direct my mind 
in your sanctities and in the work of your hands. Strengthen my spirit, that 
having rooted out all vices and the filth of my sins, I may prevail strongly in 
the joy of your mercy. (8) Breathe into me, O Lord, today with the breath of 
life, and increase my mind, my understanding, and my reasoning, through the 
firmness and perseverance of the Holy Spirit, that my spirit may be consoled 
and increase in works of praise, and the sight of you. (9) Consider, O Lord, 
and examine today the effort of my mind, and let your will rejoice in me, and 
send the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, from Heaven to me on the Earth, (10) 
that he will fortify me with perfect stability, and bring his assistance to me for 
seeing the vision of you, and praising you with praises, and delighting in your 
delights, which I desire, which are my grace, my glory, and my defense. Amen.
LXXXVII. Prayer 26.129
Maloht. Otheos. hatamagiel. hataha. marihel. gezozay. iezoray. gezozay. 
saziel. sazamay. iezoramp. zazamanp. sacamap. zachamay. iecornamas. (2) 
iecohoruampda. salatihel. gezomel. zarachiel. megalis. nachama. nechamyha. 
sazamaym. sophonaym. lazamair. mehisrampna. hamamyl. (3) zamanyl. 
sihel. |c- deloth. hamamyn. hazemeloch. moys. ramna. secoram. hanasicho-
nea. seronea. zaramahem. sacromohem. iegonomay. (4) zaramohem. chades. 
bachuc. iezemeloht. harugo. semorgizechon. malaparos. malapatas. helatay. 
helahenay. methay. meray.
LXXXVIII. Latin Prayer.130
O holy God, O merciful God, O gentle God, O almighty God, giver of all, 
make all things possible today, to me, a believer, and help my disbelief today, 
and have mercy on me today, (2) just as you had mercy on Adam when he 
repented, whereby you gave to him the grace of many virtues, through the 
mercy of your omnipotence, in an instant. (3) Grant to me this day the grace 
which I desire, through your omnipotence, that I, delighted in the greatness 
of your works, may succeed in achieving the vision of you, which I desire. 
129 Ars. Not. 118, JV p. 79.
130 Ars. Not. 119, JV p. 80.


--- PAGE 163 ---
sworn book of honorius
162
delectatus potestate tue virtutis e’¼ācaciam facialis visionis, quam desid-
ero, valeam adipisci. (’£┤) Adesto, clementissime Pater, hodie operi meo et 
clari’¼üca me, benigne, alme, clementissime unigenite ’¼üli Dei. Con’¼ürma me. 
(’£Ą) Aspira me ’¼éamine Spiritus sancti, omnipotens, sancte Deus. Consolida 
hodie opus meum et doce me, ut ambulem in innocencia tui ipsius Dei 
gloriosi et glorier in multitudine e’¼äuentis gracie tue, (’£Č) et impetus ’¼éu-
minis sanctissimi Spiritus civitatem cordis mei leti’¼ücet et depuret in ’¼üde 
visionis sancte et in spe e’¼ācacie et innocencie, pro qua laboro, (’£Ę) et cor 
meum caritatis largitate repleat et instauret et radiis Spiritus sancti vivi’¼ü-
cet et muniat c[l]aritate eterna15 a’¼äuentis misericordie. (’£Ė) Et non sit in me 
vacua, te queso, Deus meus, gracia tua, que maneat semper et multipliciter 
in me. (’£╣) Sana, Domine, animam meam pietate clemencie tue ine’¼Ćabilis et 
inestimabilis, quia peccavi tibi, et conforta cor meum hodie, (’£▒’£░) ut quod 
michi trades intranee recipiam et teneam et aptitudinem facialis et sancte 
tue visionis habeam per hec sacramenta tua sanctissima prefata coope-
rante gracia Patris et Filii et Spiritus sancti. Amen.
LXXXIX ’£▓’£Ę’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Sechce, pie Pater, misericors Fili, clemens Spiritus sancte, Deus, rex inef-
fabilis et inestimabilis, trinus et unus Deus, adoro te, invoco te et deprecor 
te et sanctum nomen tuum et supere’¼äuentem equitatem tuam operan-
tem omnia, (’£▓) quatinus ignoscas, indulgeas et miserearis michi, peccatori 
misero presumenti, et o’¼ācium, quod aggressus sum, de visione videnda in 
me senciam et cognoscam, (’£│) et +tu, Domine mi, ut+ gracia, quam desid-
ero, e’¼ācaciter in me vigeat et convalescat. Aperi in me, Domine, aures 
meas potenter, ut audiam. (’£┤) Conforta manus meas, ut operer. Exterge 
luctum oculorum meorum, ut videam. Dilata circumspeccionem meam, 
ut pro’¼üciam et lucescam. Con’¼ürma pedes meos, ut ambulem. (’£Ą) Expedi 
nares meas et os meum, ut olfaciam et senciam et loquar tibi placita nunc 
et semper ad honorem nominis tui, quod est benedictum in secula. Amen. 
’£▒’£Ą Ars. Not. JV p. ’£Ė’£░: caritate largotatis repleat, claritate eterna.


--- PAGE 164 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
163
(4) O most gentle Father, assist my work today, and clarify me with kindness; 
O you who are most giving and most gentle, the only-begotten son of God, 
strengthen me. (5) Breathe into me the breath of the Holy Spirit, almighty 
and holy God. Solidify today my work, and teach me, that I may walk in inno-
cence before glorious God himself and rejoice in the abundant outpouring of 
your grace, (6) and may the onslaught of the outpouring of the most Holy 
Spirit delight and purify the citadel of my heart in the faith of the holy vision 
and in the hope of the effectiveness and innocence, for which I work, (7) 
and may it renew and refill my heart with an abundance of love, and may I 
be invigorated and fortified with the rays of the Holy Spirit and the eternal 
clarity131 of abundant mercy. (8) And may your grace not be empty in me, I 
beg you, O my God, but always remain and grow in me. (9) O Lord, heal my 
soul with your ineffable and inestimable tenderness of mercy, because I have 
sinned against you, and comfort my heart this day, (10) that I may receive 
inwardly that which you will give, and retain and be suited for having the 
vision of your person, through these your most holy sacraments aforesaid, 
along with the grace of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. 
Amen.
LXXXIX. Prayer 27.132
Sechce, O tender Father, O merciful Son, O gentle Holy Spirit, O God, inef-
fable and inestimable king, threefold and one God, I honor you, I call upon 
you and beg you and your holy name and your overflowing justice performing 
all things, (2) O how great is your forgiveness, leniency, and pity for me, a 
poor sinner presuming to undertake this ceremony, for seeing and recogniz-
ing this vision. (3) And may the grace which I desire take root in me, O my 
Lord, thriving and growing strong in me. O Lord, potently open within me 
my ears, so I may hear. (4) Strengthen my hands, that I may labor. Wipe the 
grief from my eyes, that I may see. Broaden my foresight, that I may make 
advance and grow bright. Strengthen my feet, that I may walk. (5) Set my 
nostrils and mouth free, that I may smell and perceive and speak what will 
please you, now and always to the honor of your name, which is blessed for-
ever. Amen.
131 So GH, following Ars. Not. Claritate. The LIH manuscripts read caritate (ŌĆ£with 
loveŌĆØ).
132 Ars. Not. 120, JV pp. 80ŌĆō1.


--- PAGE 165 ---
sworn book of honorius
164
XC ’£▓’£Ė’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Elscha, extollo sensus carnis [et anime] mee ad te hodie, Domine, Deus 
meus, et elevo [*eleva]16 hodie cor meum ad te, ut placeant tibi, Domine, 
hodie gemitus mei et represententur in conspectu tuo, (’£▓) et complaceant 
verba et opera mea in conspectu tuo, et refulgeat hodie omnipotencia tua 
et misericordia tua in visceribus meis, et clari’¼ücetur mens mea e’¼ācaciter 
in operibus tuis, (’£│) et concrescat glori’¼ücacio in anima mea, et germinet 
gracia tua in corde meo et ore meo, ut quod commisero vel peccavero ita 
diluam, sicut beata Maria Magdalena diluit, (’£┤) et ita in tuo dono gracie 
quod a te recepero per’¼üciam, sicut sanctus apostolus tuus Paulus perfe-
cit, et sicut custodivit Abraham, ita custodiam, (’£Ą) sicut memoriter tenuit 
Jacob, teneam, ut in puri’¼ücaturarum tuarum virtute fundatus et radicatus 
in me tue misericordie fundamentum con’¼ürmatum glorier acquisisse (’£Č) et 
delectatus in operibus manuum tuarum iusticiam et pacem mentis mee et 
corporis et paulo post sanctam visionem perseveranter adoptem et adipis-
car et custodiam, (’£Ę) et Spiritus sancti tui, Domine, plenarie in me operante 
gracia hostium, sive visibilium, sive invisibilium, michi adversancium insi-
dias atque versutias gaudeam superasse. Amen. 
XCI ’£▓’£╣’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Abbadya, omnium regnorum sive potestatum visibilium sive invisibilium 
dispensator atque dispositor, Deus, et omnium bonarum voluntatum 
ordinator, (’£▓) tu, Domine, consilio tui boni Spiritus dispone voluntatem 
meam et vivi’¼üca hodie potestatem meam debilem et imbecillitatem meam 
et inordinacionem mentis mee. (’£│) Ordina, Domine, voluntatem meam 
in bonum et in beneplacito tuo et michi graciam tua in multiformem in 
benignitate dispensacionis largire propicius non ad multitudinem pec-
catorum meorum respiciens (’£┤) set michi que desidero, voluntatem tibi 
conformem, sensum in te iubilantem, anime graciam clari’¼ücantem in me, 
con’¼ürma et e’¼Ćectum meum cum gracia tua anime mee accomoda (’£Ą) et 
visita me visitacione Spiritus sancti, ut <et> quod ex carnis macula sive 
’£▒’£Č As in Ars. Not. Sl. ’£│’£Ė’£Ą’£┤ ’£▒’£▓’£Ąv.


--- PAGE 166 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
165
XC. Prayer 28.133
Elscha, lift up this day the senses of my body [and soul], O Lord my God, 
and lift up my heart to you, so that they are pleasing to you, O Lord, let my 
lamenting be manifest and known to your sight today, (2) and may my words 
and deeds be pleasing in your sight, and may your omnipotence and mercy 
shine brightly within me this day, and may my mind be effectually made clear 
in your works, (3) and may the glorification become more rooted in my soul, 
and your grace sprout forth in my heart and mouth, in order that whatever 
wrong I may have done or committed will thus be washed away, even as the 
blessed Mary Magdalen washed it away,134 (4) and thus I will have received 
and completed it through the gift of grace that I have received from you, even 
as your apostle Paul did, and even as Abraham kept it, so will I also keep it, (5) 
even as Jacob kept it in his memory, so will I also keep it, so that being founded 
and rooted in the power of your purification, strengthened in the foundation 
of your mercy, I rejoice to acquire (6) and delight in the works of your hands, 
justice and peace of my mind and body, and soon after I may attain the holy 
vision, and steadfastly choose and keep, (7) and with the grace of your Holy 
Spirit working fully in me, O Lord, I may overcome all my enemies, whether 
visible or invisible, and rejoice over any treacherous and cunning adversaries. 
Amen.
XCI. Prayer 29.135
Abbadya, O God, dispenser and disposer of all kingdoms, whether visible 
or invisible, and ordainer and arranger of all good wills, (2) dispose my will, 
through the counsel of your good spirit, and bring to life my weak power 
today and the weakness and disorder of my mind. (3) Arrange O Lord, my 
will into good and what is pleasing to you, and grant me your manifold grace, 
dispensed with kindness, not considering the multitude of my sins (4) but a 
will conformable to yours, rejoicing in the perception of you, making mani-
fest in me the grace of my soul, and confirming it, and inclining my work with 
your grace (5) and visit me with the visitation of the Holy Spirit, that the stain 
133 Ars. Not. 121, JV p. 81.
134 See Luke 7:47. After washing JesusŌĆÖ feet, he declared ŌĆ£Her sins, which are many, are 
forgiven; for she loved much.ŌĆØ (KJV)
135 Ars. Not. 122, JV pp. 81ŌĆō2.


--- PAGE 167 ---
sworn book of honorius
166
quod ex nativitate aut ex peccati labe contraxi divina tua [illa] ine’¼Ćabi-
lis pietas aboleat, (’£Č) qua in principio celum et terram creare voluisti, illa 
spiritualis magna misericordia tua restauret, (’£Ę) qua hominem perditum 
ad gracie pristinum statum amissum revocare dignatus es, cui iudicium 
Sathane facultatem visionis abstulit et intellectus. 
(’£Ė) Tu, Domine, cuius sensus atque sapiencia et claritas est attingens a 
’¼üne usque ad ’¼ünem fortiter et disponens omnia suaviter et misericorditer, 
omnem sinceritatem atque puritatem in me restituas, (’£╣) ut ego, indig-
nus peccator et miser, in omnibus operibus tuis con’¼ürmatus in hiis, que 
desidero, habilis e’¼āciar et perspicuus et claribundus triplici et septemplici 
Patris et Filii et Spiritus sancti largitate e’¼āciar (’£▒’£░) ad optinendum sanc-
tam facialem sancte et gloriose trinitatis visionem meo vivente corpusculo 
Deo prestante et administrante, cooperante sua sanctissima gracia, qui 
vivit et regnat trinus et unus. Amen. 
XCII ’£│’£░’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Alpha et ╬®, Deus, vivorum dominator et omnium visibilium et invisi-
bilium administrator, fecundator omnibus omnia singulis singula tribuens 
secundum nature sue facultatem, (’£▓) pro [e]qualitate meritorum angelo-
rum et hominum gracie celestis largitatem in me infunde, ut gracia Spiri-
tus sancti hodie cor meum et animam meam illustret, (’£│) et tu, Domine, 
multiplica in me dona Spiritus sancti et corrobora et innova [in] me inte-
riorem hominem et fecunda me rore tue gracie, qua angelos rorasti, (’£┤) et 
adorna me largitate innocencie tue, qua a principio ’¼üdeles tuos adornasti, 
ut operentur in me septiformis gracie munera Spiritus sancti tui, (’£Ą) et 
aque superioris ’¼éuminis Ierusalem cum impetu ’¼éuentes puteum conscien-
cie mee et animum meum irrigent, repleant et exuberent caritate, (’£Č) qua 
de celo venisti super aquas, maiestatis tue. Huius puri sacramenti in me 
con’¼ürma magnalia [ac] huius sancte visionis. Amen.


--- PAGE 168 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
167
which I have because of my flesh, or because of my birth, or incurred through 
sin, may be wiped out through your divine ineffable kindness, (6) whereby in 
the beginning you willed to create Heaven and Earth, that your spiritual and 
great mercy may deign to restore (7) to its former state of grace, that which 
mankind has lost, which ability of seeing and comprehending the judgment 
of Satan has stolen away. 
(8) You, O Lord, whose understanding, wisdom, and clarity powerfully 
reach from one end to the other, and administering all things graciously and 
mercifully, may you restore all integrity and purity in me, (9) that I, an unwor-
thy and wretched sinner, being strengthened in all your works, which I desire, 
that I may be able to attain the threefold and sevenfold abundance of the 
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, which makes things clear and apparent (10) for 
attaining the holy vision of your sacred and glorious Trinity in person, while 
my body lives, God willing and administering by his most holy grace, who 
lives and reigns threefold and one. Amen.
XCII. Prayer 30.136
Alpha and Omega, God, ruler of the living, and director of all visible and 
invisible things, you make all things fertile, giving to each one according to 
its natural ability, (2) for the sake of the [e]quality of the merits of angels and 
people, pour into me the abundance of the heavenly grace, that the grace of 
the Holy Spirit will illuminate my heart and my soul today, (3) and O Lord, 
multiply the gifts of the Holy Spirit in me and strengthen and alter [in] me 
the inner man, and make me fertile with the dew of your grace, with which 
you have bedewed the angels, (4) and adorn me with the abundance of your 
righteousness, with which you have adorned your faithful from the begin-
ning, so that the sevenfold gifts of grace of your Holy Spirit may work in me, 
(5) and the waters of the higher river of Jerusalem, flowing with force, and fill 
up the well of my conscience and my soul, that they may refill and surge up 
with the greatness of your love, (6) wherewith you came from heaven over the 
waters.137 Confirm in me the mighty works of this pure sacrament [and] of 
this sacred vision. Amen.
136 Ars. Not. 123, JV p. 82.
137 Gen. 1:2.


--- PAGE 169 ---
sworn book of honorius
168
XCIII ’£│’£▒’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Leyste, pro’¼üteor tibi hodie, Deus, Pater omnium, qui secreta celestia 
ostendisti. Te deprecor suppliciter et maiestatem tuam precor et exoro, 
(’£▓) ut, sicut tu es rex et princeps cogitacionum, voluntatum et animarum 
et omnium virtutum aliarum, hodie exaudi preces meas, (’£│) et dirigantur 
operaciones mee in conspectu tuo, et acciones mee in conspectu celes-
tium virtutum prevaleant. (’£┤) Clamo hodie ad te, Deus meus; nunc exaudi 
clamorem meum. Ingemisco ad te; hodie exaudi gemitus cordis mei. (’£Ą) Et 
ego commendo hodie spiritum meum, corpus meum et animam meam et 
cogitaciones meas in manus tuas, Pater mi et Deus meus, (’£Č) et ne me a te 
senciam derelictum set misericordia in tuam in me [senciam], et exaltetur 
nomen tuum in me, clementissime Spiritus sancte, Deus, (’£Ę) cuius bonitas 
est eterna, cuius misericordia est incomprehensibilis, cuius perpetua clari-
tas, cuius possessione pleni sunt celi et terra, (’£Ė) aspira et respice in me, 
Domine, et [intende] ad hanc operacionem meam, et quod in tue laudis 
honore devote postulo michi concede, ut in me omnis profectus17 facialis 
et sancte visione dispensacione divina compleatur. (’£╣) Doce me, Domine, 
quia in te pono me docendum. Puri’¼üca me, Domine, quia in te pono me 
puri’¼ücandum. Clari’¼üca me, Domine, quia in te pono me clari’¼ücandum. 
(’£▒’£░) Mundi’¼üca me, Domine, quia in te pono me mundi’¼ücandum. Innocen-
ti’¼üca me, Domine, quia in te pono me innocenti’¼ücandum. Glori’¼üca me, 
Domine, quia in te pono me glori’¼ücandum. (’£▒’£▒) Rege me, Domine, quia in 
te pono me regendum, et in me gracie tue ’¼üdem infunde et ’¼üge, ut Spiritus 
tuus sanctus in me veniat, regnet et imperet pro hac sancta visione divina. 
Amen. 
XCIV ’£│’£▓’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Horistion, Domine, quia ego servus tuus sum, servio tibi hodie et con-
’¼üteor coram maiestate glorie tue, in cuius conspectu omnis magni’¼ücencia 
et sanctimonia est, (’£▓) et deprecor sanctum et ine’¼Ćabile nomen tuum, qua-
tinus ad tante operacionis mee e’¼Ćectum hodie aures tue pietatis inclines 
et oculos tue maiestatis accomodes, (’£│) ut aperiente te manum tuam 
gracia<m>, quam desidero, sacier et fecunder caritate et claritate, qua 
’£▒’£Ę So Sl. ’£│’£Ė’£Ą’£┤ ’£▒’£▓’£Čr col. ’£▓. Sl. ’£│’£Ė’£Ė’£Ą (C): perfectis; Sl. ’£│’£▒’£│ (B): perfeccio.Sl. ’£│’£Ė’£Ė’£Ą ’£▒’£│’£Ąv: et in me 
omnis profectus huius operacionis dispensacione diuina compleatur.


--- PAGE 170 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
169
XCIII. Prayer 31.138
Leyste, I declare to you today, O God, Father of all things, who revealed the 
heavenly secrets. I humbly beg you and pray and entreat your greatness, (2) 
that since you are the king and ruler of thoughts, intentions, and souls, and 
of all other virtues, hear my prayers this day, (3) and may my operations be 
directed in your sight, and may my actions prevail in the sight of your heav-
enly powers. (4) I cry out to you today, my God; hear now my cry. I grieve 
to you; hear now the grieving of my heart. (5) And I entrust today my spirit, 
my body, and my soul, and my thoughts into your hands, O my Father and 
my God, (6) and let me never feel abandoned by you, but rather sense your 
compassion in me, and may your name be exalted in me, O most merciful 
Holy Spirit O God, (7) whose goodness is eternal, whose mercy is incompre-
hensible, whose brightness is everlasting, whose substance fills Heaven and 
Earth, (8) breathe into me and look upon me, O Lord, and this operation 
of mine, and for your praise and honor grant my devout request, I beg you, 
that all progress in this sacred vision may be fulfilled in me with divine guid-
ance. (9) Teach me, O Lord, in whom I entrust myself for teaching. Purify 
me, O Lord, in whom I entrust myself to be purified. Clarify me, O Lord, for 
I entrust myself in you to be clarified. (10) Cleanse me, O Lord, in whom I 
entrust myself to be cleansed. Make me innocent, O Lord, for I entrust myself 
to be made innocent by you. Glorify me, O Lord, in whom I entrust myself 
to be made glorious. (11) Guide me, O Lord, in whom I entrust myself to be 
guided, and pour into me the faith of your grace, and secure it  so that your 
Holy Spirit may come into me, and may rule and command me for the sake of 
this holy divine vision. Amen.
XCIV. Prayer 32.139
Horistion, O Lord, because I am your servant, I serve you today, and I confess 
before the majesty of your glory, in whose sight is all generosity and purity, (2) 
and I beg your holy and ineffable name, that this day you might turn the ears 
of your piety to the successful completion of my operation, and apply the eyes 
of your majesty, (3) that as you open your hand by the grace which I desire, 
I may be satisfied and made fertile with charity and with clarity, with which 
138 Ars. Not. 124, JV p. 83.
139 Ars. Not. 125, JV p. 83.


--- PAGE 171 ---
sworn book of honorius
170
celum fundasti et terram, te, Pater piissime, largiente, qui vivis et regnas 
solus per omnia secula seculorum. Amen. 
XCV ’£│’£│’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Jeremon, clementissime Domine, Deus meus, et miserere mei et parce 
malis meis. Sana animam meam, quia peccavi tibi. Non abneges uni 
quod pluribus contulisti. (’£▓) Exaudi, Deus, oracionem famuli tui N, et in 
quacumque die invocavero te. Velociter exaudi me, sicut exaudisti sanctam 
Mariam Magdalenam. (’£│) Suscipe, Domine, clamorem con’¼ütentis ad te, 
audi vocem precantis et per oraciones beatissime Marie virginis, matris 
tue, atque omnium sanctorum tuorum, (’£┤) ut oraciones et preces perve-
niant ad aures pietatis tue, quas ego, N, pro hac sancta visione e’¼Ćundo 
coram te in hac hora, ut per tua sanctissima nomina et sacramenta, (’£Ą) que 
sunt Hosel. Iesel. Hazaiacol. Iosel. Authiachar. Hazacol. Gezor. Gezamy-
hor. Namathar. Senales. Iole. Tarotheos. Lochos. Genos. Halla. Samyhel. 
Ramay. Sacharios. Logos. Patir. Sarahc. Iothosym. (’£Č) mundatus, puri’¼üca-
tus, clari’¼ücatus, innocenti’¼ücatus et consecratus ad hanc gloriam et sac-
ram tui facialem visionem pervenire merear prestante Domino nostro Iesu 
Christo, qui vivit et regnat per omnia secula seculorum. Amen. 
XCVI ’£│’£┤’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Hofbor, excelse Domine, Deus invisibilis, Deus inestimabilis, Deus inef-
fabilis, Deus incommutabilis, Deus incorruptibilis, Deus piisime, Deus 
dulcissime, Deus excelse, Deus gloriose, Deus inmense, Deus omnipotens, 
Deus, Pater tocius misericordie, (’£▓) ego, licet indignus et plenus iniqui-
tate, dolo et malicia, suplex ad tuam venio misericordiam orans et depre-
cans, ut non respicias ad universa et innumerabilia peccata mea set, sicut 
consuevisti peccatorum misereri et preces humilium exaudire, (’£│) ita me, 
famulum tuum N, licet indignum, exaudire digneris clamantem ad te pro 
hac sanctissima visione divina humiliter et desiderantissime a te postu-
lata prece tuis sanctis sacramentis insignita, que sunt Hosel, Iesel et cetera, 


--- PAGE 172 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
171
you have generously established heaven and earth, you, O most holy Father, 
who lives and reigns alone, forever and ever. Amen.
XCV. Prayer 33.140
Jeremon, most generous, my Lord and my God, have mercy on me, and con-
sider my faults. ŌĆ£Heal my soul, because I have sinned against you.ŌĆØ141 Do not 
deny to the one that which you have given to the many. (2) Hear, O God, 
the prayer of your servant N., and in whichever day I will call upon you, 
quickly hear me, as you heard the holy Mary Magdalen. (3) Accept, O Lord, 
the cries of him who confesses to you; hear the voice of the praying and by 
the prayers of the blessed virgin Mary, your mother, and all of your saints, 
(4) that these prayers and pleas for this holy vision, which I, N., pour out 
personally to you right now, may reach the ears of your piety, that through 
your most holy names and sacraments, (5) which are: Hosel. Iesel. Hazaia-
col. Iosel. Authiachar. Hazacol. Gezor. Gezamyhor. Namathar. Senales. Iole. 
Tarotheos. Lochos. Genos. Halla. Samyhel. Ramay. Sacharios. Logos. Patir. 
Sarahc. Iothosym. (6) being cleaned, purified, glorified, made innocent and 
consecrated, and I may be worthy to attain the vision of your glorious and 
sacred shape, with our Lord Jesus Christ as our guide, who lives and reigns 
forever and ever. Amen.
XCVI. Prayer 34.
Hofbor, O Lord, who dwells on high, invisible God, inestimable God, ineffa-
ble God, unchangeable God, incorruptible God, O God most-pious, O God 
most sweet, O God most high, O glorious God, O immeasurable God, O 
almighty God, O God, the Father of all mercy, (2) I, although unworthy and 
full of iniquity, deceit, and vice, I come humbly begging and pleading for your 
mercy, that you donŌĆÖt consider all my countless sins, but just as you are accus-
tomed to show mercy on sinners, and to hear the prayers of the humble, (3) so 
too deign to hear me, your servant N., although unworthy, crying to you for 
this most holy and divine vision, humbly and