SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii — the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 2/28  |  CHARS: 23163-47804 of 659348
============================================================

s ii: 
Western/Latin Christianity
A major influence on the magic of Honorius is traditional devout Chris-
tian practice, with its common prayers (adapted in some cases), observance 
of liturgical hours, abstinence, use of the hair shirt, and enlisting the help 
30 Kieckhefer 1998 p. 256. See also Veenstra 2012 p. 186 n. 27.
31 Namely, seven divine names used in the Seal of God (IV.14–47, CXXVII.15): Layaly, 
etc. See below.
32 See Raziel and Liber Semiphoras, 6/7Moses in Peterson 2008 p. 265.


--- PAGE 18 ---
Introduction
17
of a priest. Honorius includes both the Apostle’s Creed and the Athanasian 
Creed, both of which point to the influence of the Western or Latin (Catho-
lic) church. Similarly, near the very end, the text quotes the blessing of salt, 
which is a traditional part of Western or Roman ritual. In this form it is not 
part of Byzantine or Orthodox tradition.
The text also recognizes the traditional Christian classification of angels, 
as codified by Pseudo-Dionysius (5th–6th century A.D.) and Gregory the 
Great (circa 540–604 A.D). Honorius differs however in the order, placing 
the Cherubim before Seraphim, and Principalities before Powers: Cherubim, 
Seraphim, Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Principalities, Powers, Archan-
gels, and Angels.33 
Many of the prayers are reminiscent of medieval Benedictine spiritual 
exercises, such as those of German mystic Saint Gertrude of Helfta (1256–ca. 
1302). Gertrude also had special sympathy towards the souls in purgatory, a 
subject which is alluded to a couple of times in the Sworn Book.
Origins and parallels III: 
Eastern Christianity and Byzantium
As Mathiesen pointed out, the author of the Sworn Book clearly had “some 
knowledge of the liturgy of the Greek Orthodox Church.”34 In his edition of 
the Latin text, Hedegård suggested the planetary spirits chapters of the Sworn 
Book might be based on a Greek source.35 Boudet too raised the possibility 
that the classification of aerial daemons might be of Byzantine origin. This is 
supported by the fact that many of them are found in a Byzantine manual of 
exorcism, published by Delatte. This manuscript was dated by the catalogers 
as 1735. The names of the demons and their controlling angels correspond 
closely with Honorius chapters CV-CXI. According to Delatte, “Each group 
of air demons and wind demons is under the authority of three angels who, 
under the direction of an archangel, impose his authority through a special 
seal.” There are also parallels in Petrus de Abano’s Heptameron seu Elementa 
33 Boudet 2002 p. 863.
34 Mathiesen 1998 p. 161 n34.
35 Hedegård 2002 p. 50.


--- PAGE 19 ---
sworn book of honorius
18
Magica,36 as well as the fifteenth-century Book of Angels,37 and in the fifteenth-
century necromancer’s manual published by Richard Kieckhefer.38
The spirits associated with the Moon also occur in the Astromagia of 
Alfonso X (written circa 1280). This treatise is primarily about constructing 
astrological talismans; many of these are taken from Picatrix, but this one is 
attributed to Raziel. The text reads: 
Engrave on the sigil the name of the angel and the wind serving the 
Moon, and commanding over its sign (which is Cancer), with his 
aides. The angel is Gabriel and his aides are Michael and Samiel. 
These are the names of the winds that command over Cancer: 
Hebetel and Halmitab [later spelled Almutab]; and their aides who 
are Bylol [later spelled Bibol], Milalu, and Abuzoba.39
36 The earliest edition of this concise handbook of ritual magic appears to be Venice, 
1496 (Lynn Thorndike, Magic and Experimental Science, vol. II, p. 925.) The attribution 
of the text to the famous physician Petrus de Abano (1250–1316) “seems quite certainly 
spurious” according to Thorndike (op. cit., p. 912). His reputation as a magician developed 
quite early however.
37 Boudet 2002 p. 867: “L. Delatte, Un office byzantin d’exorcisme. [Bruxelles]: [Palais des 
académies], 1957, p. 121–122, points out, among others, Arcan, called king of aerial spirits, 
then king of Zephyr (the West) and his servants Bileth, Misabou, and Abouzaba. They 
can be found with names distorted in § 23 (of the spirits of the Moon) and 28 (on Western 
spirits). But the same names also appear in the Astromagia of Alfonso X (see Alfonso el 
Sabio, cit., pp. 138–139 and 144–145) and in the Liber de angelis of Pseudo-Messahala, 
published by J.G. Lidaka, The Book of angels, cit., p. 64–65.” (translation mine). The Book 
of Angels was published in Lidaka 1998.
38 Kieckhefer 1998 pp. 181, 303–305.
39 Alfonso X 1992 pp. 138–139 (my translation).
Seals of the archangels from Byzantine exorcism manual / Delatte 1957 p. 98


--- PAGE 20 ---
Introduction
19
Un office byzantin 
d’exorcisme f 15, 27, 
36-36v, f99v
Heptameron
Honorius
Book of Angels
King: Maimon 
(Μαϋμὀν)
Servants: Aboumaleth, 
Asaïbi, Balidet 
(᾿Αβουμαλήθ, 
᾿Ασαϊβί, Βαλιδέτ)
Ruling Angels: Kasiel, 
Machotan, Ourouel 
(Κασιήλ, Μαχωτάν, 
Ούρουήλ)
K: Maymon
S: Abumalith, 
Assaibi, Balidet
RA: Cassiel, 
Machatan, Vriel 
(Saturn)
K: Maymon
S: Albunalich, 
Assaibi, Haibalidech, 
Yasfla
RA: Bohel, Cafziel, 
Michrathon, 
Saterquiel (CV/
Saturn)
K: Mayrion
“the Black One will 
create the voids”
Cassael, Maxtarcop, 
Stanalcon
K South (Σούθ)
S: Magouth, Goutriz 
(Μαγούθ, Γουτρίζ)
RA: Sakiel, Kastiel, 
Asasiel (Σακιήλ, 
Καστιήλ, ᾿Ασασιήλ)
K: Suth
S: Maguth, Gutriz
RA: Sachiel, Castiel, 
Asasiel (Jupiter)
K: Formione
S: Guth, Maguth, 
Guthryn
RA: Satquiel, 
Raphael, 
Pahamcocihel, 
Asassaiel (CVI/
Jupiter)
K: Marastac
S: Aycolaytoum, 
Lord of Torments
RA: Sariel, Staus, 
Iucuciel [or Cricios, 
Faccas, Casfeel]
K: Samax (Σαμάξ)
S: Carmax, Ismoli, 
Pafran (Καρμάξ, 
Ίσμολί, Παφράν)
RA: Samael, Satael, 
Amabiel
(Σαμαήλ, Σαταήλ, 
Άμαβιήλ)
K: Samax
S: Carmax, Ismoli, 
Paffran 
RA: Samael, Satael, 
Amabiel (Mars)
K: Iammax
S: Carmox, Ycanohl, 
Pasfran
RA: Samahel, Satihel, 
Yturahihel, Amabiel 
(CVII/Mars)
Rubeus Pugnator 
(“Red Fighter”)*
S: Karmal, Iobial, 
Yfasue
Saliciel [aka 
Salatiel], Ycaachel 
[aka Taxael], 
Harmanel [aka 
Harnariel]
K: Barcan (Βαρκαν)
S: Tous, Adas, Cunabal 
(Τούς, ᾿Αδάς, 
Κυναβάλ)
RA: Michael, Dardiel, 
Khourataphel 
(Μιχαήλ, Δαρδιήλ, 
Χουραταϕήλ)
K: Varcan
S: Tus, Andas, 
Cynabal
RA: Michael, 
Dardiel, Huratapel
K: Barthan
S: Thaadas, Chaudas, 
Ialchal
RA: Raphael, 
Cafhael, Dardihel, 
Hurathaphel (CVIII/
Sun)
Barchan
Chatas, Hycandas, 
Yaciatal
RA: Raphael, 
Dardaci [aka 
Daniel], Talanasiel 
[aka Caualasyel]
K: Sarabotres 
(Σαραβότρες)
S: Amabiel, Aba, 
Abalidoth, Phlaeph 
(᾿Αμαβιήλ, ᾿Αβά, 
᾿Αβαλιδώθ, Φλαέ)
RA: Anael, Rakhiel, 
Sakhiel (᾿αναήλ, 
᾿ραχιήλ, Σαχιήλ)
K: Sarabrotres 
S: Amabiel, Aba, 
Abalidoth, Flaëf
RA: Anael, Rachiel, 
Sachiel  (Venus)
K: Sarabocres
S: Nassar, Cynassa
RA: Hanahel, 
Raquiel, Salguyel 
(CIX/Venus)
* On these seven kings addressed by colors, see Scholem 1965 p. 2.


--- PAGE 21 ---
sworn book of honorius
20
Un office byzantin 
d’exorcisme f 15, 27, 
36-36v, f99v
Heptameron
Honorius
Book of Angels
K: Modiath (or 
Mediath) (Μοδιαθ or 
Μεδιάθ)
S: Soukinos, Sallales 
(Σουκίνος, 
Σαλλάλες)
RA: Raphael, Miel, 
Saraphiel (᾿ραϕαήλ, 
Μιήλ, Σαραϕιήλ)
K: Modiat
S: Suquinos, Sallales 
RA: Raphael, Miel, 
Saraphiel (Mercury)
K: Habaa
S: Hyyci, Quyron, 
Zach, Eladeb
RA: Mychael, Myhel, 
Sarapiel (CX/Mercury)
K: Zombar
S: Darial, Faccas
RA: Michael, Sariel, 
Miriel†
K: Arcan (᾿Αρκαν)
S: Bileth (Βιλέθ), 
Misabou 
(Μισσαβού), 
Abouzaba (or 
Abuzampa) 
(Αβουζαβα)
RA: Gabriel, Michael, 
Samael (Γαβριήλ, 
Μιχαήλ, Σαμαήλ)
K: Arcan
S: Bilet, Missabu, 
Abuzaha
RA: Gabriel, 
Michael, Samael 
(Moon)
K: Harthan
S: Bileth, Misabou, 
Abouzaba
RA: Michael, Gabriel, 
Samyel, Atithael. 
(Moon) (CXI/Moon)
K: Abdalaa
S: Baysul, Maylalu, 
Ebuzoba
RA: Gabriel, 
Samayel, Michael
Another passage shows even more variations on these names: 
The angels who have power over (the Moon) are Gabriel, Szamahel 
[later spelled Esmahel], and Michael.... The king who rules over this 
image is the honored Abdala, and his servants are Baylul, Maylalu, 
and Ebuzoba. Over this talisman recite the following invocation:  
“I beseech you, angels in charge of the character of the Moon, by the 
name of Ilamos, Namoz, Heyeyl, Caffaa, Bassal, Nacha, Cana, swift 
Calta, Cahala.”40
It seems therefore that by 1280, the names had already been known long 
enough for significant variations to develop, and that some unknown Raziel 
text was the source.41 Given how far these differ from Honorius, it seems 
40 Alfonso X 1992 pp. 144–145.
41 The editor likewise comments (p. 383): “This talisman must derive from the Book of 
Raziel, but I have not tracked in ms. Reg. Lat. 1300.” Since Damaris Gehr is working on 
these texts, hopefully she will shed more light on it in the future.
† Planet is not identified, so correspondence is uncertain.


--- PAGE 22 ---
Introduction
21
unlikely that Honorius was informed by Alfonso’s Greek and Arabic transla-
tion activities.
We can also see from the above that Honorius is sometimes closer to the 
Byzantine text than are the other texts. For example, “H” in Harthan, “th” in 
Bileth, and “ou” in Abouzaba and Misabou reflect the Greek spellings more 
closely than the other texts. Incorporation of Byzantine material would also 
explain the puzzling variety of spellings by Honorius, for example, the seem-
ingly arbitrary insertion of the letter “h.” This could reflect indecision on how 
to transliterate the Greek: A few examples should illustrate: Miel vs. Mihel 
(Gk. Μιήλ), Dardiel vs. Dardihel (Gk. Δαρδιήλ), and Harkan vs. Arcan (Gk. 
᾿Αρκάν).
In other cases, Honorius differs where Petrus and the Greek agree. Hono-
rius generally includes more names than the others. The ruling angel of Mer-
cury is also interesting. In Petrus (similarly Cardanus and Michael Scotus), the 
ruling archangel is identified as Raphael, while Liber Semiphoras and Agrippa 
identify him as Michael.42 Hence Honorius is closer to Liber Semiphoras.
In the great exorcism in the Byzantine manual only seals of four archan-
gels are preserved, owing to damage at the bottom of folio 102. These four 
are similar to those in Heptameron, which has all seven. It has generally been 
assumed that the seals of the archangels found in the Royal manuscript are 
an insertion directly from Heptameron, but perhaps they were actually pres-
ent in the original Sworn Book after all. Heptameron clearly labels the archan-
gels associated with each seal, but the Royal manuscript just associates them 
with the planet, which is odd if the scribe took them directly from de Abano. 
Nothing resembling these appear in Ganell however.43
Another part of the Byzantine exorcism manual has parallels in Hono-
rius: The “great exorcism” (f36v), parallels Honorius CXXXIII.38: “πάντα 
τὰ πονηρὰ δαιμόνια Βεραλανεῦσις, Βαλδακιόνσης, Πανμαχιά, 
Άπολογίου καθέδραι, δοῦλοι τῆς ταρταρέας καθέδρας, Πριμάκ, 
Βαρκάν, Τούς....” (“the ever-evil demons Beralanysis, Baldakionsis, Pan-
machia, Apologias cathedrai, slaves of Tartar cathedra, Primak, Barkan, 
Tous...”)44
42 Peterson 2008 pp. 156, 165.
43 See also parallel seals in Kieckhefer 1998 pp. 303-305.
44 The “Exorcism of the Spirits of the Air” (f. 11–14v, 102v–104v) also closely parallels 
Heptameron “Exorcismus Spirituum Aereorum,” pp. 112–120..


--- PAGE 23 ---
sworn book of honorius
22
The concept of angels and daemons associated with the days, hours, and 
cardinal directions is also found in Byzantine sources, although the details 
differ.45 Likewise with the use of magic circles with sacred names, and features 
aligned to the compass, gloves and other apparel,46 as well as incenses (aro-
mata) used to attract and placate the daemons.47
Another puzzle is found in CXL.11 where we read the following: “Casziel, 
Satquiel, and so on. Furthermore, there are seven superiors, namely Barachiel, 
Uriel, and the rest.” This is the only place that Barachiel is mentioned, so it 
is apparent the original reference has gotten lost, or was expected to be well 
known. Unfortunately, this doesn’t help identify the provenance, since Uriel 
and Barachiel are both known as archangels from a variety of traditions, 
including Orthodox, Latin, the Sibylline Oracles, and ancient Jewish magic.48
In summary, it seems likely that all these sources descended from a com-
mon ancestor, likely a Byzantine one, and none of them are directly depen-
dent on another.
Evolution of the text
As Frank Klaassen has pointed out, the literature of ritual magic often encour-
ages the process of personalizing or transforming the text.49 The Elizabethan 
magi John Dee and Edward Kelly clearly do this with Honorius material in 
their experiments with spirit communication.50
Although many minor differences occur in the manuscripts, only one 
(Sloane 3854) appears to contain the complete text. Moreover, recent studies 
45 Greenfield 1988 pp. 338 ff. Marathakis 2011 pp. 55–74, pp. 101–106, pp. 285–291.
46 Greenfield 1995 p. 136; Marathakis p. 94–95.
47 Greenfield 1995 p. 135.
48 For Sibylline Oracles, see Charlesworth 1983 p. 350. For examples from Jewish magic 
see Bohak 2008 pp. 315, 318, and Casanowicz 1976 p. 162. Barachiel (also spelled Baruchiel, 
Barakiel, or Baraqiel) is one of the seven archangels in orthodox tradition (along with 
Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, Uriel, Salathiel, Jegudiel) See St. Nikolai Velimirovic, The 
Prologue of Ohrid—Volume One. The Synaxis icon includes Jegudiel, Gabriel, Selaphiel, 
Michael, Uriel, Raphael, and Barachiel. Images on the Basilica of St. Mary of the Angels 
and the Martyrs (16th century) testify to the Western tradition. (Mark Bredin, Studies 
in the Book of Tobit: A Multidisciplinary Approach, London [u.a.]: T & T Clark, 2006, 
p. 121.)
49 Klaassen 2014 p. 4.
50 Peterson 2008.


--- PAGE 24 ---
Introduction
23
have deduced some evolution of the text. This can be shown from the fact 
that large portions of the text are quoted in Ganell’s Summa Sacre Magice 
(SSM), including apparently some original “Honorius” material which is not 
found in the other manuscripts. Ganell’s text also shows differences in the 
order of the material. Analyzing these differences, researchers have found 
evidence that the better-known group of manuscripts has been redacted at 
some point. Thus scholars have started referring to this better-known mate-
rial as the “London Honorius” or “Northwestern European” tradition. (The 
use of “London” is somewhat of a misnomer, since a German manuscript also 
exists.51)
Veenstra has demonstrated that the “London Honorius” has adapted the 
text somewhat, such as likely moving the instructions on consecrating the Seal 
of God to the beginning.52 Further evidence of this change is that the German 
manuscript preserves the presumed original order: part 1: To behold the face 
of the Deity; part 2: Knowledge of the angels; part 3: Knowledge of the 
spirits of the air, their binding and which spirits are under them; part 4: 
Knowledge of the spirits of the earth; part 5: Knowledge of the great name 
of God, in Hebrew Shem ha-Meforash, with instructions for constructing the 
Seal of God.
More evidence of the editorial process may be the unusual variation of 
the Tetragrammaton, “Ioth He Vau Deleth,” found in two places in the text: 
CXXXIII.39 and CXXXVII.5. These may be mistakes, evidence of the com-
piler’s unfamiliarity with Hebrew, a possibility suggested by both Mesler and 
Veenstra.53 However this seems unlikely to me given the fact that the “mis-
take” recurs. Moreover, the form also occurs in other texts, such as Vincu-
lum Salomonis, a text which does not appear to derive from Honorius.54 The 
substitution of Deleth could also have been intentional to avoid writing the 
51 Leipzig Cod. Mag. 16.
52 Veenstra 2012 pp. 151 ff, and especially pp. 167–168.
53 Mesler 2012 p. 118, Veenstra 2012 pp. 172–173. There is a parallel passage to CXXXIII.39 
in de Abano’s text, Heptameron (H) pp. 120–122, which reads “per hoc nomen ineffabile, 
Tetragrammaton IHVH Iehouah,” but this may easily be a later editorial correction. 
Similarly SSM L.3.f.37.
54 For example, Wellcome 110 fol. 36r. This manuscript has been dated late 16th century: 
“et quod ex quatuor literis constat scilicet Ioth he vahu deleth et per novem celestia 
candelabra [sic], et per eorum virtutes quatenus etc.”


--- PAGE 25 ---
sworn book of honorius
24
correct name (maybe clued by deleth = he deletes?).55 However, since the text 
abounds in sacred names of God, that explanation seems unlikely to me too. 
A third possibility is that the compiler was simply preserving the form found 
in his source material, which had itself conservatively censored the correct 
form of the name. This is consistent with the eclectic nature of the text.
A comparison of the manuscripts shows other evidence of transforma-
tions aside from introducing minor errors. For example, the Royal manu-
script in some instances preserves earlier readings; however, it also seems 
to have excised material on demons, leaving only the angels (which it also 
expanded upon). Some of the manuscripts altered the magic circle to have 
seven equal segments. To judge by comparison with Ganell’s Honorius mate-
rial, the northern European redactor may have removed material about the 
four demon kings (Amaymon, Oriens or Orienens, Paymon, and Egyn), seals 
of the spirits, and further instructions about ritual instruments.56
The psalter is another interesting case. These core prayers are essential to 
the magic of Honorius, yet they differ in the northern Honorius and in the 
Honorius quoted by Ganell. Perhaps they were originally a separate detached 
text, or possibly they got omitted at some point. In the northern European 
recension, the want was supplied by prayers taken from Ars Notoria. In Gan-
ell’s text, the core prayers are taken from a book called the Liber Trium Ani-
marum (LTA). It now seems certain that the use of Ars Notoria is a departure 
from the hypothetical Ur text, based on the dating of the specific variations 
of Ars Notoria used. The original version of Honorius may have included the 
LTA prayers, but it is of course possible the LTA was a different attempt to fill 
the gap left from the missing prayers. Curiously, Ganell’s Summa also includes 
prayers from the Ars Notoria, which he refers to as the “old art.”57
In conclusion, it seems likely that the compiler had some knowledge of 
Jewish Kabbalah and Merkabah traditions, and wanted to incorporate the 
55 Suggested by Mesler, p. 139.
56 Ganell goes into details of 4 kings of the N/S/E/W. In some cases he specifically states 
that Honorius does not provide instructions, so he will supplement the information, 
for example his chapter on the vestments. Ganell’s text shows clear signs of redaction in 
some cases, such as crossing out words which are found in other manuscripts. There are 
many example where he uses th and t interchangeably, e.g. thetragramaton but elsewhere 
tetragramathon.
57 For example, L.4.f.9 “oracio quartus artis veretis: Helyscemath, hazaram, hemel” = 
Honorius chapter XVI = Ars Not. 7, JV p. 146.


--- PAGE 26 ---
Introduction
25
concepts into his own system, based more on Christian elements, such as 
names of Christ, and traditional prayers. He also likely incorporated mate-
rial from some Byzantine source, resulting in a method that was truly at the 
crossroads of various traditions.
Elements of magic as taught by Honorius
Vision of God, or the Beatific Vision
The key to the entire of system of magic taught by Honorius is the magical 
means for achieving the vision of God, even as the saints and prophets them-
selves knew God. This section of the text was probably the first part originally. 
Mathiesen singles out this as the most interesting and important historically, 
without parallel in magical literature.58
As mentioned above, this was a key element of Jewish Merkabah 
mysticism,59 as well as various Christian authors such as Pseudo-Dionysius. 
Theodoric of Freiberg (ca. 1240–ca. 1320), a German Dominican theologian, 
wrote an influential treatise on the subject, called Tractatus de visione beatifica. 
The writings of Christian mystics, such as Saint Gertrude of Helfta, abound 
in visions of Jesus and Mary, so this may be a logical extension of those too.
Honorius professes to provide a practical way to achieve this, going far 
beyond anything the conventional church rituals could offer.
Seals of angels
The term seal (sigilla) is used in two different senses in the magic of Hono-
rius. The first designates specific texts to be recited to bind the spirits.60 It can 
also mean physical seals or sigils of angels or spirits that can be held in the 
hand.61 Unfortunately, no examples of the second type are represented in the 
manuscripts.62 Chapter CXXV.4 states these seals may be engraved on silver, 
and possibly tin or other metals. Ganell, who has a tendency to supplement 
58 Mathiesen, 1998 pp. 150 ff.
59 Michael D. Schwartz 2006, pp. 415.
60 See Veenstra 2012 p. 190 n 79.
61 CXXXI: magister habens signum Dei et sigilla in manu sua dextra. See also 
CXXXIX.2.
62 The exception is R, which may be an accretion derived from Heptameron.


--- PAGE 27 ---
sworn book of honorius
26
Honorius, in some cases simply uses the written names of the spirits, some-
times in Hebrew.63 One rare exception is the “seal of Amaymon” found in the 
Summa on L.3.f.22.
Given the parallel texts, perhaps something close to the seals found in the 
Royal manuscript were originally present in the lost Ur-text.
Other variations of these same seals are included in the fifteenth-century 
Munich handbook.64
63 For example, L.5.f.63.
64 Kieckhefer 1998 pp. 367–368.
Seal of Amaymon, from Ganell
Seals of the archangels from Royal MS 17Axlii fols. 67v–70r


--- PAGE 28 ---
Introduction
27
Seal of God or Seal of Solomon: Signum Dei, Sigillum Dei
The concept of a great seal, commonly called the Seal of Solomon, is cen-
tral to Solomonic magic. Early references can be found in the Greek Magical 
Papyri.65 Duling mentions a second to third century metal-foil amulet which 
mentions it.66 One of the oldest examples is found in the Testament of Solo-
mon (1st to 3th ce), described as engraved on a precious stone, which some 
manuscripts expand on as being a pentalpha, or five-pointed star.67 Many 
versions of the seal of Solomon can be found in magical literature, from the 
simple pentalpha to the extremely elaborate.68 Many versions, including that 
in the Sworn Book contain the pentalpha as a central or key element.
The great seal as described by Honorius is likewise central to his magic. 
He refers to it variously as the Seal of the True and Living God, the Seal of 
the Eternal, Living, and True God, the Sign (or Seal) of God, the Sacrosanct 
Seal, the Seal of the Sacred Names of God, the Sacred (or Holy) Seal; the Sign 
of Solomon, the Seal of Solomon, the Sign (or Seal) of the Lord, the Sacred 
Seal, the Sacred [Seal] of God; the Sign of Solomon given by the Lord, or 
simply the Sign.69 Ganell also refers to it at times as the Divine Sign.70 Note, it 
is never referred to as the Seal of Truth (Heb. Aemeth), which John Dee uses.71
65 PGM IV.3041. Betz, Hans Dieter. The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation, Including 
the Demotic Spells. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986, p. 96. 
66 Duling 1983, p. 948.
67 For a recent translation, see Duling 1983 pp. 935 ff. On the seal, see p. 962 and note k. 
On later treatment of the Testament, see Sarah Iles Johnston, “The Testament of Solomon 
from Late Antiquity to the Renaissance” in Bremmer and Veenstra 2002. For bibliography, 
see also G. Fitzer, Theological Dictionary of the New Testament 7 (1971): 947, n. 72.
68 The version in Grimorium Verum (Peterson 2007, p. 80) is fairly simple. Jean-Patrice 
Boudet 2006 planche XIV shows a particularly elaborate example from an Italian edition 
of the Key of Solomon (1446). Paris, BnF, ms. Ital. 1524, fol. 186.
69 Sigillum Dei, III.7, IV.51, CXXXVII.15, 18, 21, CXL.5; Sigillum Dei vivi et veri, 
IV.1; Sigillum Dei eterni, vivi, et veri, CXXXVII.1; Signum Dei, CXV.7, CXXXI.1, 
CXXXIX.2. Signum Domini, CXV.2, CXXIX.4, CXXXIII.46, CXXXVII.22. Sigillum 
Domini CXXXIX.3; Sacrosanctum Sigillum IV.65; Sigillum sanctorum nominum Dei, 
CXV.14; Sacrum Sigillum, CXXXIII.13, CXXXVII.7; Sacrum Sigillum Dei, CXXXII.12; 
Sanctum Sigillum, CXXXIII.53, CXXXVII.12; Sigillum Salomonis, CXXXIII.37; 
Signum Salomonis, CXXVI.14, CXXXIII.30, 51; Signum Salomonis a Domino datum, 
CXXXIII.30; Signum, CXV.45, CXXXIII.37.
70 Signum diuino, e.g. SSM L.3.f.6.
71 Peterson 2003, especially pp. 22, 79.


