SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii — the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 25/28  |  CHARS: 571369-595865 of 659348
============================================================

o be admitted 
while we say with humble praise.” GH p. 35: In ch cxxxviii additional information is given 
about the saying of masses during the second purification: We are told which mass should 
be said and what its preface should be on each day ...
294 This seems to be simply the traditional Preface of the Apostles. I see no alteration.
295 “... lifts up our minds and bestows on us strength and rewards; through Christ our 
Lord. Through whom the Angels praise your greatness” etc. as above.


--- PAGE 293 ---
sworn book of honorius
292
In 4a die missam de nativitate imperatricis angelorum [et] “ ... Et te in 
nativitate beate Marie” et cetera. 
(8) 5a dies 
In 5a die missam annunciacionis eiusdem [et] “ ... Et te in annun-
ciacione” et cetera.
(9) 6a dies.
In 6a die missam nativitatis Christi, et ista sit prefacio: ‘... Quia per 
incarnati verbi misterium nova’ et cetera.90
(10) 7a dies 
In 7a die missam epiphanie, et prefacio: ‘... Quia, cum unigenitus tuus 
in substancia nostre’ et cetera.91
(11) 8a dies 
In 8a die missam purificacionis, et prefacio: “ ... Et te in purificacione 
beate Marie ....”
(12) 9a dies.
In nona die missam resurreccionis, et prefacio: ‘... <Et> te quidem, 
Domine, omni tempore set in hac potissimum nocte’—vel ‘die’—‘gloriosius 
predicare, cum pascha nostrum” et cetera.92
(13) 10a dies 
In 10a die missam ascencionis, et prefacio: ‘ ... Qui post resurreccionem 
suam omnibus discipulis suis manifestus apparuit’ et cetera. 
(14) XIa dies 
In XIa die missam assumpcionis beate Marie, et prefacio sit: “ ... Et te 
in assumpcione” et cetera. 
90 “... nova mentis nostrae oculis lux tuae claritatis infulsit: ut, dum visibiliter Deum 
cognoscimus, per hunc in invisibilum amorem rapiamur. Et ideo cum Angelis et 
Archangelis, cum Thronis et Dominationibus, cumque omni militai coelestis exercitus, 
hymnum gloriae tuae canimus sine fine dicentes.”
91 “Vere dignum et iustum est, aequum et salutare, nos tibi semper, et ubique gratias 
agere: Domine sancte, Pater omnipotens, aeterne Deus: Quia cum Unigenitus tuus in 
substantia nostrae mortalitatis apparuit, nova nos immortalitatis suae luce reparavit. Et 
ideo cum Angelis et Archangelis, cum Thronis et Dominationibus, cumque omni militia 
coelestis exercitus, hymnum gloriae tuae canimus, sine fine dicentes.”
92 “Vere dignum et iustum est, aequum et salutare, te quidem, Domine, omni tempore, 
sed [in hac potissimum nocte vel die, vel] in hoc potissimum gloriosius praedicare, cum 
Pascha nostrum immolatus est Christus. Ipse enim verus est Agnus, qui abstulit peccata 
mundi. Qui mortem nostram moriendo destruxit, et vitam resurgendo reparavit. Et ideo” 
etc.


--- PAGE 294 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
293
On the fourth day, a mass of the nativity of the queen of the angels, [and] 
“... and you in the birth of the blessed Mary” and so on.
(8) The fifth day
On the fifth day, another Mass of the Annunciation, [and] “... and you in 
the annunciation” and so on.
(9) The sixth day
On the sixth day, a Mass of the Nativity of Christ, and its preface should 
be: “... because by the mystery of the incarnate Word, the new” and so on.296
(10) The seventh day
On the seventh day, a Mass of the Epiphany, and the preface “... because, 
when your only-begotten Son appeared in the substance of our” and so on.297
(11) The eighth day
On the eighth day, a Mass of Purification, and the preface “... and you, in 
the purification, O blessed Mary....”
(12) The ninth day
On the ninth day, a Mass of the Resurrection, and the preface: “[It is truly 
right and just, and to salvation] to praise you, O Lord, at all times, but espe-
cially on this night”—or “day”—“when our Passover” and so on.298
(13) The tenth day
On the tenth day, a Mass of the Ascension, and the preface: “... who, after 
his resurrection, appeared visibly to all his disciples” and so on.
(14) The eleventh day
On the eleventh day, a Mass of the Assumption of blessed Mary, and the 
preface: “... and you, in the assumption” and so on.
296 “... a new light of your glory has shone upon the eyes of our mind, so that while we 
acknowledge God in visible form, we may be drawn by him to the love of invisible things. 
And therefore with the Angels and Archangels, with the Thrones and Dominations, and 
with all the hosts of the heavenly army, we sing the hymn of your glory, forever saying.”
297 “It it truly right and just, and for our salvation, that we should at all times, and in all 
places, give thanks to you, O holy Lord, Father almighty, everlasting God; because when 
your only-begotten Son appeared in the substance of our mortal flesh, with the new light 
of his own immortality, he restored us. And therefore with Angels and Archangels, with 
Throne and Dominations, and with all the heavenly hosts, we sing the hymn of your glory 
forever, saying.”
298 “... when our Passover was sacrificed for us. For he is the true lamb who has taken 
away the sins of the world, who by dying destroyed our death, and by rising again restored 
our life. And so” etc.


--- PAGE 295 ---
sworn book of honorius
294
() a dies 
In a die missam omnium sanctorum, et prefacio apostolorum sit, nisi 
quod vox apostolorum in vocem omnium sanctorum commutetur. 
() a dies 
In a die missam angelorum, et prefacio apostolorum, nisi quod beati 
apostoli in beatos angelos transmutentur. 
() a dies 
In a die missam Spiritus sancti, et prefacio sit: ‘... Qui ascendens 
super omnes celos’ et cetera. 
() a dies 
In quintadecima die missam sancte crucis, et prefacio sit: “ ... Qui 
salutem humani generis in ligno” et cetera. 
() a dies 
In a die missam trinitatis, et prefacio sit: “ ... Qui cum unigenito ﬁlio 
tuo et Spiritu sancto unus es<t> Deus” et cetera.
CXXXIX Quartum capitulum quinti tractatus de inicio 
aggrediendi opus invocacionis
Excitacio ventorum est principium operandi in illa XIa hora diei operis 
sacri et debet ﬁeri extra domum, longe a circulo ad duo stadia vel tria. 
() Et debet prius esse bene preparatus de necessariis suis, de optimo 
vino, de  ensibus, de sibilo, de virgula coruli, de sigillis, de signo Dei, de 
thure, de thuribulo, de candela virginea et sic de aliis, ut prius patet.
() Et scias, quod in illa pelle, ubi est sigillum Domini, debent esse tria 
sigilla predicta sub signo ita, quod pendeant de manu. () Sigillum ange-
lorum sit immediate sub signo Dei et sub illo sigillum aereorum et sub illo 
terreorum. 


--- PAGE 296 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
295
(15) The twelfth day
On the twelfth day, a Mass of All Saints, and the preface of the Apostles, 
except the wording “the voice of the Apostles” should be altered to “in the 
voice of all the saints.”
(16) The thirteenth day
On the thirteenth day, a Mass of the Angels, and preface of the Apostles, 
except wording “the Apostles” should be altered to “the blessed angels.”
(17) The fourteenth day
On the fourteenth day, a Mass of the Holy Spirit, and the preface “... who 
ascends over all the heavens” etc.
(18) The fifteenth day
On the fifteenth day, a Mass of the Holy Cross, and the preface “... who 
placed the salvation of the human race in the wood of the cross” etc.
(19) The sixteenth day
On the sixteenth day, as Mass of the Trinity, and the preface “... who with 
your only-begotten son and the Holy Spirit are one God” etc.
CXXXIX. The fourth chapter of the Fifth Treatise. Concerning 
the beginning of undertaking the work of invocation.
The raising up of the winds is the first part of the operation in the eleventh 
hour of the day of the sacred work, and it must be done outside the house, 
away from the circle by two or even three stadia.299
(2) And previously you should have properly prepared all the requisites, 
namely the finest wine, seven swords, the whistle, the hazel wand, the seals, 
the Sign of God, incense, the censer, the virgin candle, and the rest, as revealed 
earlier. 
(3) And you should know, that on that skin, where the Seal of the Lord 
is, the three preceding seals must be under the Seal in such a way that they 
should hang from the hand. (4) The seal of the angels should be immediately 
under the seal of God, and under that the seal of the air, and under that of the 
earth.
299 Stade: 125 paces. Two or three stadia would be approximately one quarter to a third 
of a mile (or .2 KM).


--- PAGE 297 ---
sworn book of honorius
296
() Et quando cognoscentur motus eorum appropinquare, oportet 
ire ad circulum et delere  nomina creatoris et tunc item ut prius extra 
iuxta circulum excitare, et cum videbitis motus eorum, intrare circulum et 
facere ut est predictum. 
() Virga autem sit quadrata, et in uno latere scribatur in summitate 
“Adonay,” in secundo latere “Sabaoth,” in ° “Hiskiros,” in ° “Emanuel.” () 
In medio virge ﬁat pentagonus Salomonis et ubi virga tenetur crux, et sic 
erit parata operi sacro et miro. 
CXL Quintum capitulum quinti tractatus de composicione 
sibili et exposicione cuiusdam dicti in 3° tractatu
() Fac sibilum de ere albo vel de argento vel de auro vel avellana, et sit 
eptagonum, id est septem latera habens, sit grossum ad placitum, sit 
longum ad longitudinem trium digitorum.
() Tunc in summitate eius sculpatur hoc nomen: “On,” et inferius 
in alia summitate “Beel,” et in latere primo, ubi est forus sibili, scriba-
tur nomen regis orientalis, scilicet “Barthan,” in secundo latere a dextris 
nomen regis consol, scilicet “Formione,” () in ° regis meridiei, scilicet 
“Yammax,” in ° regis nogahelis, scilicet “Sarabocres,” in ° latere regis 
occidentalis, scilicet “Harthan,” in ° regis frigicapicis, “Abaa,” () in ” 
regis septemtrionalis, “Maymon,” et postea benedic eum sicut cruorem, 
nisi quod mutabis nomen, et ubi dicebatur “in sigillum Dei te mitti iussit” 
nunc dices “in clamatum spirituum te clangere iussit.” 
() Et scias, quod quando vocantur angeli boni, non debet habere sibi-
lum neque virgam neque enses, et tu debes stare extra circulum, et ipsi 


--- PAGE 298 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
297
(5) And when you recognize their approaching movements, you should 
go to the circle and erase the seven names of the Creator, and then likewise as 
before, to raise them up, from outside but near the circle, and when you see 
their movements, to enter the circle and to do as aforesaid.
(6) But the wand should have four sides. On one side should be written 
“Adonay;” on the second side “Sabaoth;” on the third, “Hiskiros;”300 on the 
fourth “Emanuel.” (7) On the middle of the wand make the pentagonal figure 
of Solomon, and where the wand is held, a cross, and thus it will be prepared 
for sacred and wonderful works. 
CXL. The fifth chapter of the fifth Treatise, concerning  
the composition of the whistle, and an explanation  
of certain sayings in the third Treatise.
(2) Make a whistle from white copper,301 or from silver, or from gold, or even 
hazel, and it should be heptagonal, i.e. having seven sides. It may be as large as 
you please, and its length should be as long as three fingers.302
(3) Then, on the top should be engraved this name: “On;” and below, on 
the other end, “Beel303;”  and on the first side, where the finger holes are, the 
name of the eastern king should be written, namely “Barthan,” and on the 
side to the right, the name of the king of Consol, namely “Formione.” (4) 
On the third, that of the king of the South, namely “Yammax,” on the fourth, 
the king of Nogahel [sic], namely “Sarabocres,” on the fifth side, that of the 
western king, namely “Harthan,” on the sixth, that of the king of Frigicap, (5) 
“Abaa,” and on the seventh side, the name of the northern king, “Maymon.”
And afterwards, bless it as you did the blood, except that you should 
change the wording, and instead of saying “commanded to be put into the 
Seal of God” now you should say “command you to clang in proclaiming the 
spirits.” 
(6) And know, that whenever good angels are called, you must not have 
the whistle, wand, nor the swords, and you must stand outside the circle, and 
300 Hiskiros: Greek ισχυρος, Iskhiros (Mighty One).
301 A copper/nickel/(zinc) alloy.
302 As a measure of length, digitus generally means the breadth of a finger, or about ¾ to 
7/8 of an inch.
303 B 25v reads “bael,” with “beel” written in the margin. It is not certain whether the 
spirit Boel/Bohel is intended, or if this is an otherwise unattested name of God.


--- PAGE 299 ---
sworn book of honorius
298
debent apparere infra circulum, qui debet esse altus tribus pedibus et 
semis.
(7) Set in aliis aereis et terreis oportet predicta habere. Set differt 
inter illos, quia illi aerei apparent extra circulum in aere homine exis-
tente infra circulum, (8) qui debet esse totus planus sicut +epiparet+,93 
set in terreis sic est, quod ipsi apparent infra circulum concavum, profun-
dum et rotundum homine existente infra alium circulum ab illis circulis 
predictis, (9) qui tamen similiter debet esse planus et equus, et circa eum 
scripta solum 4 nomina Dei, prout patet.
(10) Angeli hore sunt qui regnant in hora operis, angeli diei qui in die 
operis, angeli mensis angeli Lune vel principii mensis, angeli faciei qui reg-
nant facie, ubi est eorum dominium, ascendente, temporis omnes insimul, 
(11) et principes eorum omnium sunt 7, ut patuit supra: Casziel, Satquiel et 
cetera. Adhuc sunt 7 superiores, scilicet Barachiel, Uriel et cetera.
CXLI.
Explicit liber de vita anime racionalis, qui liber sacer vel liber angelorum 
vel liber iuratus nuncupatur, quem fecit Honorius, magister Thebarum. 
(2) Hic est liber, quo Deus in hac vita facialiter quit videri. Hic est liber, 
quo quilibet potest salvari et in vitam eternam procul dubio deduci. Hic 
est liber, quo infernus et purgatorium queunt sine morte videri. (3) Hic 
est liber, quo omnis creatura exceptis novem ordinibus angelorum pos-
sunt subiugari. Hic est liber, quo omnes s[c]iencie possunt haberi. (4) Hic 
est liber, quo substancia imbecillissima potest substancias robustissimas 
et devincere et subiugare. Hic est liber, quem nulla lex habet nisi Chris-
tiana, et si habet, nil sibi prodest. (5) Hic est liber, qui est maius iocale 
93 Reading equiparet. GH: sicut eriperet in marg. Ext. B; an sic, ut equiparet (sc. terrae) 
vel fort. sicut et prius patet (cfr LI. et CXXXIX.) scribendum sit?”


--- PAGE 300 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
299
they themselves will appear within304  the circle, which must be three and a 
half feet high. 
(7) But you must have those instruments when dealing with aerial or ter-
restrial spirits. But it differs between them, because those of the air appear 
above the circle in the air, while you are within the other circle, (8) which 
must be completely level and equalized, but those of the earth are such that 
they will appear within the hollow circle, deep and round, while you are 
within the other circle, which is apart from those preceding circles, (9) yet 
it must similarly be flat and level, and around it written only four names of 
God, as shown.
(10) The angels of the hour are those who rule in the hour of the work; 
the angels of the day, those who rule on the day which you work; the angels 
of the month, those angels ruling the Moon or beginning of the month; the 
angels of the aspect (or face),305 those who rule the face where their dominion 
is, with the ascendant, all at the same time, (11) and there are seven leaders of 
all of them, as shown above: Casziel, Satquiel, and so on. 
Furthermore, there are seven superiors, namely Barachiel, Uriel, and the rest.
CXLI.
Here ends the book concerning the life of the rational soul, which is called 
the Sacred Book, or the Book of the Angels, or the Sworn Book, which was 
made by Honorius, the master of Thebes. (2) This is the book, with which one 
is able to see God face to face, while still alive. This is the book, with which 
anyone is able to be saved and without doubt led into eternal life. This is 
the book, with which Hell and Purgatory can be seen without dying. (3) This 
is the book, whereby all creatures are able to be subjugated, except for the nine 
orders of angels. This is the book, whereby all knowledge can be obtained. (4) 
This is the book, whereby one with the weakest substance is able to subdue 
and subjugate those with the strongest substances. This is the book, which 
no religion possesses except the Christian, and those of other faiths will find 
nothing useful for themselves in it. (5) This is the book, which is the greatest 
304 This seems to be the meaning here, as in IV.2, although “below” or “under” would be 
the more common meaning. Mesler 2012 p. 114 similarly reads “within” in her translation 
of CXV.35 (mistakenly identified as LXV).
305 Face: i.e. decan.


--- PAGE 301 ---
sworn book of honorius
300
a Domino datum omni alio iocali exclusis sacramentis. Hic est liber, quo 
natura corporalis et visibilis cum incorporali et invisibili alloqui, racionari 
et instrui potest. () Hic est liber, quo innumerabiles thesauri haberi pos-
sunt. Et multa alia per hunc ﬁeri queunt, que narrare dispendium esset. 
Ideo merito sacer nuncupatur.
Scriptus fuit liber iste et completus  
Die martis hora 10a que est ho


--- PAGE 302 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
301
jewel of all the jewels given by the Lord, other than the sacraments. This is 
the book, whereby one of corporeal and visible nature is able speak to, reason 
with, and be instructed by those with incorporeal and invisible natures. (6) 
This is the book, whereby innumerable treasures can be obtained. And many 
other things can be done through this, more than can be told. Therefore it is 
rightly called sacred. 
The writing of this book has been completed on the  
tenth hour of this day, Tuesday, which is ho....306
306 The manuscript breaks off right in the middle of this colophon.


--- PAGE 304 ---
303
Appendix I.  
Corrections and Addenda  
to Hedegård 2002
p. 67 line 21: “Casziel” should read “Cafziel”
p. 96 line 1: “peritus” should read “penitus” per Sl. 3854 123r, R 50r, and Ars Not.
p. 113 line 7: “aquisicione” should read “acquisitione”. See Sl. 3854 128r col. 2.
p. 119 “volusiti” should read “voluisti” per Sl. 3853 131r & Sl. 3854 130r.
p. 139 line 4: “per nominatos” should read “pernominatos.” See Sl. 3854 135v, Sl. 3853 
156r, and SSH L.3.f.35.
p. 139 line 16: “con[v]icto” should read “concito”. So Sl, 3854 136r, Sl. 3853 157r. SSM: 
“excito.”
p. 141, line 4: “{.}eneolia, Chide” should read “{G}eneolia, Chide.” Compare Sl. 3853: 
“Geuolia chide”; Heptameron: “genii, Liachidae.”
p. 143 line 16: “adulaua” should read “cadulaua.” The c is barely legible, but supported 
by SSM.
p. 143 line 21 “[vel tegula]” should read “vel tegulis” per Sl. 3854 137r.
p. 144: “In hac operacione 4” should read “In hac operacione sed”
p. 206 line 14: “11” add “virtute virtute”: Sl. 3853 155r omits second “virtute”; SSM: 
“cum omnium suorum fulgencium spirituum [in marg: collegio] potenciam et 
[erased word], virtute huius celestis ….”


--- PAGE 305 ---
304
Appendix II.  
Variants of Some of the figures
Seal of God, reconstructed per Sloane 313, fol. 4r


--- PAGE 306 ---
305
Appendix II: Variants of Some of the Figures
Magic circle per SSM, L.4.f.22


--- PAGE 307 ---
306
Bibliography
Manuscripts, primary sources
The Sworn Book is represented in the following manuscripts:
London, British Library:
Sloane 3854 (mid-14th century) Folios 112r-139r. “Honorii Magistri Thebarum liber 
cui titulus ‘Juratus.’” or “Liber Juratus, vel liber de vita Animæ rationalis Qui 
Liber Sacer, vel Liber Angelorum nuncupatur quem fecit Honorius Magister The-
barum, ” etc. This is the oldest and best quality manuscript, and formed the main 
basis for this transcription, as well as that of GH and Boudet. Carefully written 
and legible, with rubricated initials, although many initials were never supplied.
Sloane 313 (second half of 14th century). 27 folios. Missing 3 folios between 24 and 
25. The title in the catalog reads simply “Tract on Magic, ” or “Salomonis opus 
sacrum ab Honorio ordinatum, tractatus de arte magica.” It is an important inde-
pendent witness to most of the text, belonging to another family than Sl. 3854. 
This manuscript is known to have been in the collection of dramatist Ben Jonson 
(1572-1637). It was later owned by John Dee, and contains marginal notes in his 
handwriting.1
Sloane 3885 (The watermark has been dated to 1588) Folios 58-96. “Liber sacer Salo-
monis, ”  “Tractatus de re magica ab Honorio filio Euclidis magistro Thebarum 
ex septem voluminibus artis magicae compilatus, et intitulatus Liber sacer, sive 
juratus, ” or “Opera Salomonis ab Honorio ordinata” (cursive script). Contains 
only the first three treatises. The Honorius material is bound with unrelated texts, 
including the Practica Nigromanciae (i.e. Thesaurus Spirituum) of pseudo-Bacon.
Royal 17Axlii (Latin and English, dated mid-sixteenth century because of borrowing 
from Agrippa not found in the older manuscripts). 82 folios. Does not include 
all of the text, but breaks off just after the beginning of chapter CXV, namely 
just short of the actual instructions for invoking the angels. The title in the cata-
log reads “The Sworne Booke of Honoryus.” Illuminated with drawings of angels 
and their seals, as well as marginal flourishes and ornaments, usually colored, 
sometimes in gold; chapter headings in red, blue, or green. On the fly-leaf (f. 1) 
are some late 16th cent. pen-drawings with the initials R. T. Sophie Page 2004 
includes some wonderful color photos from this manuscript. Waite 1898 correctly 
identified this manuscript as sixteenth century, even though he omitted to give 
1 Roberts, R. J., Andrew G. Watson, and John Dee. John Dee’s Library Catalogue. 
London: Bibliographical Society, 1990, pp. 57, 168.


--- PAGE 308 ---
307
Bibliography
the catalog identification. According to Jean-Patrice Boudet, this is a presentation 
copy on vellum, probably created for some noble.2
Sloane 3853 (Mid-16th century): This manuscript contains large portions of the 
Sworn Book, along with excerpts from Agrippa (with citations) and many other 
texts. English and Latin. Although belonging to the same family of manuscripts as 
Sl. 3854 and Sl. 3885 (see above), it was not used by GH, but is an important wit-
ness to portions of the text, including the drawing of the magic circle, and shows 
some independence. Contains 127v-137v (“fol 163f ”): Catalogued as ‘The Divine 
Seal of Solomon, ’ 127v variation of Sigillum Dei Aemeth; 128r-v: English version 
of IV.49-65; 129r-130v: XXVII-XXX, LXXVII-LXXIX, LXX; 130v-134v: CII-
CXV.48; 134v-135v: LXXIII, XCIII; 135v-137v: CXXXV.8-17, CXXXVII.1-19, 
CI.2-8. 149r-174v: CXXVII ff.
Sloane 3849 (dated 1577) Article 7, folios 30-38 contains excerpts from LIH.
Germany
SSM: Halle, Universitätsbibliothek Kassel - Landesbibliothek und Murhardsche Bib-
liothek der Stadt Kassel, Ms. 4o astron. 3. Latin, 15th ce. A beautiful and unique 
manuscript of Ganell’s Summa sacre magice. (written circa 1346). Available online 
at http://orka.bibliothek.uni-kassel.de/viewer/image/1343812736802/1/. This 
text quotes extensively from Liber Iuratus, as well as other texts. John Dee owned 
and annotated this manuscript at one time. 
SSMG: Berlin, Staatsbibliothek Preußischer Kulturbesitz, Ms. Germ. Fol. 903. Ger-
man translation of Ganell’s Summa Sacre Magice (SSM). Circe 1580’s.3
Leipzig Cod. Mag. 16: (pp. 1-176), titled Die alleredelste und allerhöchste Kunst und 
Wissenschaft, das ist: Magia universalis divina angelica ac diabolica (“The noblest 
and highest art and science, namely the universal divine angelic and demonic 
magic”). German, ca 1750. PART 1: To behold the face of the Deity (the 100 
names of God pp. 25 ff ); PART 2 (pp 55 ff ): Knowledge of the angels (e.g. Sat-
urn: Boel, Cassiel, Micraton, Saterquiel); PART 3 (pp 94 ff ): Knowledge of the 
spirits of the air, their binding and which spirits are under them (Hartan, Bileth, 
etc); PART 4 (pp 160 ff ): Knowledge of the spirits of the earth; PART 5 (pp. 170 
ff): Knowledge of the great name of God, in Hebrew Shem ha-Meforash (and 
construction of the Seal of God).4 Includes names of spirits of the planets (pp. 57 
ff and 99 ff); the magic circle (p. 98, p. 112), spirits of the earth (CXXXIV ff, pp. 
160 ff)… circle for invoking spirits of the earth (p. 165) sigillum dei (p. 175, called 
“das sigillum salomonis”).
2 Boudet 2002 p. 852.
3 Gilly 2002 p. 290.
4 The manuscript continues with a version of Thesaurus Spirituum.


