SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii вҖ” the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 5/28  |  CHARS: 93892-117704 of 659348
============================================================

d provide himself no more than three; 
вң вҖӮ [3] And that it will be given to no woman, nor to a man unless he is 
mature, and most upright and faithful, (22) both of which should be assessed 
by observing his mannerisms throughout an entire year;
вң вҖӮ [4] And that otherwise it should not be destroyed, but returned to 
him or to his successors; 
вң вҖӮ (23) [5] And that, if no one sufficient is found to whom the book might 
be given, that the master must bind his executors with the strongest oaths to 


--- PAGE 53 ---
sworn book of honorius
52
et honeste nec locum alicui per aliquas circumstancias revelabit; (пңІпңө) et si 
magister ex discipulis aliquam necessitatem habeat aut velit eos aliqualiter 
probare, quod pro preceptis suis complendis mortem pati, si necesse fuerit, 
non timebunt; (пңІпң¶) et quod habens non inquiret de dictis vel factis magistri 
sui, nec ipsum magistrum suum talia scire alicui revelabit, nec dabit ad hoc 
circumstancias declarantes; (пңІпң·) et quod sicut pater alligat п¬Ғlios suos, ita 
magister discipulos suos alligabit in concordia et amore, (пңІпңё) ita quod unus 
detrimentum alterius pacietur nec unus secretum alterius revelabit, sed 
erunt п¬Ғdeles, unanimes et concordes. (пңІпң№) Nono iurabit recipiensвҖ”et post 
istud transsibit iuramentumвҖ”hec omnia predicta observare, et ob hanc 
causam librum hunc vocitamus iuratum. 
II Incipit liber. 
In nomine igitur omnipotentis Domini nostri Iesu Christi, vivi et veri Dei, 
ego Honorius opera Salomonis in libro meo taliter ordinavi, quod premisi 
capitula, ut pateant clarius que secuntur.
(2) Capitula primi operis 
Primum capitulum de composicione magni nominis Dei, quod apud 
Hebreos dicitur Semenphoras et est пң·пңІ literarum, quod est principium in 
hac arte. 
(пңі) пңІum de visione divina. 
пңіum de cognicione potestatis divine. 
пңҙum de absolucione peccatorum. 
пңөum ne homo incidat in peccatum mortale. 
пң¶um de redempcione trium animarum de purgatorio. 


--- PAGE 54 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
53
bury it in his tomb, (24) or he himself while living should bury it in some 
clean and honorable place, and not reveal the place under any circumstances; 
вң вҖӮ (25) [6] And if the master has a need for some students, or otherwise 
wishes to test them, that they promise they will not fear to suffer death, if 
necessary, for the sake of his teachings
вң вҖӮ (26) [7] And that he will not investigate the teachings or doings of 
their master, nor will he reveal to anyone that his master himself knows such 
things, nor will he allow the circumstances for declaring it.
вң вҖӮ (27) [8] And as a father binds his sons, so the master will bind his 
disciples in harmony and love, (28) so that each will bear the suffering of the 
others, nor will one reveal the secrets of another, but they will be faithful, 
harmonious, and in agreement.
вң вҖӮ (29) [9] With the ninth he will swear on receiving the oath that he 
will pass on all of the preceding in turn, and for this reason we call this the 
Sworn Book. 
II. Beginning of the Book.
Therefore, in the name of our almighty Lord Jesus Christ, the living and true 
God, I Honorius have laid out the works of Solomon in such a manner in my 
book, which topics I have listed in advance, in order to more clearly show 
what follows.
(2) The Topics of the First Work.
1. The first topic, concerning the composition of the great name of God, 
which the Hebrews call вҖңShem Ha-Meforash,вҖқ and is of 72 letters, which is the 
beginning of this art.
(3) 2. Concerning the Divine vision.
3. Concerning the knowledge of Divine power.
4. Concerning the absolution of sins.
5. Lest one falls into mortal sin.
6. Concerning the redemption of three souls from Purgatory.


--- PAGE 55 ---
sworn book of honorius
54
(4) Capitula secundi operis 
Septimum de cognicione celorum. 
пңёum de cognicione angelorum cuiuslibet celi. 
пң№um de cognicione cuiuslibet angeli et nominis et potestatis eius. 
(пңө) пңұпң°um de cognicione sigillorum cuiuslibet angeli et virtutis eorum.
пңұпңұum de cognicione superiorum cuiuslibet angeli.
пңұпңІum de cognicione oп¬ғcii cuiuslibet angeli. 
(пң¶) пңұпңіum de invocacione et associacione cuiuslibet angeli. 
пңұпңҙum de impetracione voluntatis per quemlibet angelum. 
пңұпңөum de impetracione omnium scienciarum. 
пңұпң¶um de hora mortis sienda. 
(пң·) пңұпң·um de omnibus presentibus, preteritis et futuris sciendis. 
пңұпңёum de cognicione planetarum et stellarum. 
пңұпң№um de cognicione virtutum planetarum et stellarum et quid habent 
inп¬Ӯuere. 
(пңё) пңІпң°um de inп¬Ӯuenciis planetarum et stellarum mutandis. 
пңІпңұum de mutacione diei in noctem et noctis in diem. 
пңІпңІum de cognicione spirituum et animalium aereorum. 
(пң№) пңІпңіum de cognicione spirituum ignis et eorum nominum et superi-
orum et sigillorum et potestatum et virtutum eorum. 
пңІпңҙum de cognicione nominum et virtutum superiorum spirituum. 
(пңұпң°) пңІпңөum de cognicione sigillorum et virtutum eorum. 
пңІпң¶um de cognicione permixtionis et permutacionis elementorum et 
corporum ex hiis mixtorum.
(пңұпңұ) пңІпң·um de cognicione omnium herbarum, plantarum et omnium ani-
malium existencium super terram et virtutum eorum. 
(пңұпңІ) пңІпңёum de cognicione humane nature et omnium factorum hominis, 
que sunt cogitata et que sunt abscondita et ignota in ipsa. 
(пңұпңі) пңІпң№um de cognicione aquaticorum spirituum et virtutum [et] supe-
riorum ipsorum. 
пңіпң°um de cognicione terrenorum et infernorum spirituum. 
(пңұпңҙ) пңіпңұum de visione purgatorii et inferni et animarum ibidem existen-
cium. 
пңіпңІum de obligacione corporis et anime ad revertendum. 
пңіпңіum de sacracione huius libri. 


--- PAGE 56 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
55
(4) The Topics of the Second Work.
7. Concerning the knowledge of the Heavens.
8. Concerning the knowledge of the angels of each of the Heavens.
9. Concerning the knowledge of each angelвҖҷs name and powers
(5) 10. Concerning the knowledge of the seals of each angel, and their 
virtues.
11. Concerning the knowledge of the superiors of each angel
12. To know the office of any angel. 
(6) 13. Regarding the invocation of any angel, and associating with them. 
14. To obtain your wishes through any angel. 
15. To obtain all knowledge. 
16. To know the hour of death. 
(7) 17. To know all things past, present, and future. 
18. To know the planets and stars. 
19. To know the virtues of the planets and stars and their influences. 
(8) 20. To change the influences of the planets and stars. 
21. To change day into night, and night into day. 
22. To know the spirits and creatures of the air.
(9) 23. To know the spirits of the fire, their names, superiors, seals, pow-
ers, and virtues. 
24. To know the names and virtues of the higher spirits. 
(10) 25. To know their seals and virtues. 
26. To know the mixing and changing of elements, and of the bodies 
mixed from them.
(11) 27. To know all herbs, plants, and all animals which exist on the earth, 
and their virtues. 
(12) 28. To understand human nature and all human achievements, and 
what are his hidden and unknown intentions.
(13) 29. To know the aquatic spirits, and their virtues and superiors. 
30. To know all terrestrial and infernal spirits.
(14) 31. Concerning the vision of purgatory and hell, and of the souls 
abiding there. 
32. Concerning the promise that the body and soul will be reunited. 
33. Concerning the consecration of this book.


--- PAGE 57 ---
sworn book of honorius
56
(15) Capitula tercii operis 
Tricesimum quartum de constriccione spirituum per verba. 
пңіпңөum de constriccione spirituum per sigilla. 
пңіпң¶um de constriccione spirituum per tabulas. 
пңіпң·um de forma cuilibet spiritui imponenda. 
(пңұпң¶) пңіпңёum de inclusione spirituum. 
пңіпң№um de incluso spiritu ut respondeat vel non.
пңҙпң°um de fulgure et tonitruo provocando. 
пңҙпңұum de combustione facienda. 
пңҙпңІum de puriп¬Ғcacione aeris. 
(пңұпң·) пңҙпңіum de corrupcione aeris. 
пңҙпңҙum de nive et gelu facienda. 
пңҙпңөum de rore et pluvia facienda. 
пңҙпң¶um de п¬Ӯoribus et fructibus provocandis. 
пңҙпң·um de invisibilitate. 
пңҙпңёum de equo. 
(пңұпңё) пңҙпң№um de absente quod veniat in hora sanus. 
пңөпң°um de re, que deferatur in momento ubicumque volueris. 
пңөпңұum de abstraccione rei. 
пңөпңІum de revocacione rei. 
пңөпңіum de transп¬Ғguracione cuiuscumque. 
(пңұпң№) пңөпңҙum de п¬Ӯumine provocando in terra sicca.
пңөпңөum de commocione regni contra dominum. 
пңөпң¶um de regno vel imperio destruendo. 
пңөпң·um de habendo potestatem super quemlibet. 
пңөпңёum de mille militibus armatis habendis. 
(пңІпң°) пңөпң№um de formacione castri indestructibilis.
пң¶пң°um de speculo perverso componendo. 
пң¶пңұum de destruccione loci vel inimici per speculum perversum. 
пң¶пңІum de speculo aparicionis mundi. 
(пңІпңұ) пң¶пңіum de fure et furto revocando. 


--- PAGE 58 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
57
(15) The Topics of the Third Work.
34. Concerning the binding of spirits through words. 
35. Concerning the binding of spirits through seals. 
36. Concerning the binding of spirits through tables. 
37. Concerning imposing a form to any spirit. 
(16) 38. The confinement of spirits. 
39. In order that a confined spirit will answer or not.
40. To call forth lightning and thunder.
41. Concerning suffumigations that must be made. 
42. Concerning the purification of the air. 
(17) 43. Concerning the corruption of the air. 
44. To make snow and frost. 
45. To make dew and rain. 
46. To call forth flowers and fruit.
47. For invisibility.
48. Concerning a horse.3
(18) 49. To bring a missing person back safely in an hour. 
50. To transport something wherever you wish, in a moment. 
51. To have something removed. 
52. To recall something. 
53. To transfigure anything. 
(19) 54. To cause a river on dry land. 
55. To incite a kingdom against its ruler. 
56. To destroy a kingdom or state. 
57. To have power over anyone. 
58. To have 1 thousand armed soldiers. 
(20) 59. To form an indestructible fortress.
60. How to make a mirror of destruction. 
61. How to destroy a place or an enemy using the mirror of destruction.
62. The apparition of the world in a mirror (or glass).
(21) 63. To return anything which a thief has stolen. 
3 CXVI reiterates the topics with more detail: вҖңConcerning a horse, which will carry you 
anywhere you wish in a single night.вҖқ CXX specifies that the spirits of the West can make 
horses fast. Sl. 3853 fol. 38v has a chapter on how to magically have a fast horse, вҖңwhich can 
carry you from England to Jerusalem in under an hour.вҖқ Compare Kieckhefer, Forbidden 
Rites, p. 54.


--- PAGE 59 ---
sworn book of honorius
58
пң¶пңҙum de seraturis aperiendis. 
пң¶пңөum de discordia facienda. 
пң¶пң¶um de concordia provocanda. 
пң¶пң·um de habenda gracia et benivolencia omnium personarum.
(пңІпңІ) [пң¶пңёum de mulieribus habendis ad libitum.]
пң¶пң№um de diviciis habendis. 
пң·пң°um de curacione cuiuslibet inп¬Ғrmitatis. 
пң·пңұum de dando inп¬Ғrmitatem cuilibet et qualemcumque placuerit 
operanti. 
пң·пңІum de interп¬Ғciendo quemcumque. 
(пңІпңі) пң·пңіum de tempestate et periculo terre et maris faciendo. 
пң·пңҙum de nave retenta in mari per adamantem vel aliter retrahenda.
пң·пңөum de omni periculo evitando. 
пң·пң¶um de congregacione et capcione avium. 
(пңІпңҙ) пң·пң·um de piscibus congregandis et capiendis. 
пң·пңёum de animalibus silvestribus congregandis et capiendis.
пң·пң№um de bello faciendo inter aves vel pisces vel animalia. 
(пңІпңө) пңёпң°um de apparencia combustionis. 
пңёпңұum de apparencia ioculatorum et puellarum psallencium.
пңёпңІum de apparencia gardinorum vel castrorum. 
пңёпңіum de apparencia militum pugnancium. 
(пңІпң¶) пңёпңҙum de apparencia griphonum et drachonum. 
пңёпңөum de apparencia omnium ferarum. 
пңёпң¶um de apparencia venatoris et canum in venacione.
пңёпң·um de apparencia hominis quod sit alibi quam est. 
пңёпңёum de apparencia tocius voluptatis. 
(27) Capitula quarti operis 
Octagesimum nonum de incarceratis habendis. 
пң№пң°um de seris et carceribus reserandis. 
пң№пңұum de thesauris, metallis et lapidibus preciosis et omnibus rebus 
absconditis in terra habendis. 


--- PAGE 60 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
59
64. To open locks. 
65. To cause discord. 
66. To cause agreement. 
67. To have the good will and favor of all persons.
(22) [68. To have the desire of women.]4
69. To have wealth. 
70. To cure any sickness. 
71. To make anyone sick, whenever you wish.
72. To kill anyone. 
(23) 73. To hold back storms and dangers of the earth and sea. 
74. To hold back a ship at sea using the adamant stone, or otherwise to 
bring it back again. 
75. To avoid all danger. 
76. To flock birds together, and collect them. 
(24) 77. To cause fish to gather and be caught. 
78. To cause woodland animals to gather and be caught. 
79. To cause war between the birds, or fish, or animals. 
(25) 80. To make burning appear. 
81. To make appear jesters and girls singing Psalms.5
82. To make gardens or fortresses appear.
83. To make appear soldiers fighting.
(26) 84. To make griffins and dragons appear. 
85. To make all wild beasts appear. 
86. To make hunters and dogs appear hunting. 
87. To make someone appear as if they were somewhere other than where 
they actually are. 
88. To make all pleasures appear. 
(27) The Topics of the Fourth Work.
89. To release someone who is imprisoned. 
90. To unlock bars and prisons. 
91. To obtain treasure, metals, and precious stones, and all things that are 
hidden in the earth.
4 See chapter CXVI which recounts the topics.
5 Chapter CXVI: balancium (вҖңbabblingвҖқ). SSM: ballancium (вҖңdancingвҖқ).


--- PAGE 61 ---
sworn book of honorius
60
(пңІпңё) пң№пңІum de apparencia corporum mortuorum quod loquantur et 
resuscitata appareant. 
пң№пңіum ut animalia de terra creari appareant. 
Set ista duo capitula subtraximus, quoniam erant contra Domini vol-
untatem. 
III Incipit libero 
Nos igitur cum divino adiutorio precepta Salomonis et vestigia sequi 
volentes tanteque subtilitatis vires recipere unum principium necessarium 
esse proп¬Ғtemur. (пңІ) Nota, quod primum principium est divina maiestas, 
et est invocacio vera a п¬Ғde cordis procedens et est opera iusta eп¬ғcaciam 
ostendens. (пңі) Dixit Salomon: вҖңUnus est et solus Deus, sola virtus, sola 
п¬Ғdes,вҖқ a quo unum opus, unum principium. Una perfeccio in arte consistit, 
quamvis in membris dividatur multiplicibus. (пңҙ) Et sicut partes integrales 
capiunt suum totum, licet fuerit imperfectum, similiter ex hiis nascitur 
tota virtus.
(пңө) In nomine igitur illius Dei vivi et veri, qui est Alpha et О©, princi-
pium et п¬Ғnis, qui est Pater et Filius et Spiritus sanctus, tres persone, unus 
deus, vite dator, mortis destructor, (пң¶) unde dicitur: вҖң ... qui mortem nos-
tram moriendo destruxit et vitam resurgendo reparavit, qui Novum con-
didit Testamentum,вҖқ 
(пң·) de composicione sigilli Dei ad noticiam prime partis, de visione 
divina ad noticiam secunde partis, de visione angelorum ad noticiam tercie 
partis, (пңё) de constriccione spirituum ad noticiam пңҙe partis et de ligacione 
infernorum ad noticiam пңөe partis vere operantibus per hunc modum. 
(пң№) Angelorum tres sunt modi, celestes, aerei, terrestres. Celestium 
duo sunt modi, quorum quidam serviunt Deo soli, (пңұпң°) et isti sunt пң№ ordines 
angelorum, videlicet cherubyn, seraphin, troni, dominaciones, virtutes, 
principatus, potestates, archangeli et angeli, (пңұпңұ) de quibus nec ex coacta 
virtute nec ex artiп¬Ғciali potencia inter mortales est loquendum, et isti nul-
latenus invocantur, (пңұпңІ) quia magestati divine continue laudantes assistunt 
et nuncquam ab eius presencia separantur.


--- PAGE 62 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
61
(28) 92. Concerning the appearing of dead bodies which appear to rise 
again and speak. 
93. In order that animals of the earth appear to be created.
But we have removed those two topics, because they were against the 
LordвҖҷs will.
III. Here begins the book.
We therefore, with divine help, wishing to record the teachings of Solomon, 
and to follow his footsteps with as much exactness as possible, we declare 
there to be one principle necessity. (2) Note, that the first principle is the 
Divine Majesty, and it is the true invocation proceeding from faith of the 
heart and just works, showing the effectiveness. 
(3) Solomon said: вҖңThere is only one God, one power, one faith,вҖқ from 
which a single work, a single beginning. Perfection in the art consists of one, 
although it can be divided into multiple parts. (4) And just as the integral 
parts make up the whole, although it had been incomplete, similarly from 
these the whole power is born.
(5) Therefore, in the name of that living and true God, who is Alpha and 
Omega, the beginning and the end, who is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, three 
persons, one God, the giver of life, and the destroyer of death, (6) of whom it 
is said: вҖң... Who by dying has destroyed our death,  and renewed our life with 
his resurrection, establishing a New Covenant.вҖқ6
(7) The First Part concerns the composition of the Seal of God; Part 
Two concerns the Divine Vision; Part Three concerns the vision of angels; (8) 
Part Four concerns the binding of spirits; and Part Five concerns binding the 
inhabitants of the underworld.
(9) There are three types of angels, the celestial, the aerial, and the earthly. 
There are two types of celestials, those who only serve God, (10) and those 
are the nine orders of angels, namely, the Cherubim, Seraphim, Thrones, 
Dominations, Virtues, Principalities, Powers, Archangels, and Angels, (11) 
concerning whom it is spoken among mortals neither by forced power nor by 
artificial force, and therefore in nowise should they be invoked, (12) because 
they always stand praising the divine majesty, and never separated from his 
presence. 
6 From the mass.


--- PAGE 63 ---
sworn book of honorius
62
(пңұпңі) Tamen quia humani generis anima cum ipsis formata, expectans 
cum ipsis feliciter coronari per donum et graciam Salvatoris, (пңұпңҙ) potest 
suo vivente corpore eos presencialiter cum summa maiestate veraciter 
aspicere et cum ipsis Deum laudare et suum cognoscere creatorem. (пңұпңө) 
Et ista cognicio non est cognoscere Deum in maiestate et potencia nisi illo 
modo, quo Adam et prophete cognoverunt. 
(пңұпң¶) Set istud est principaliter notandum, quod operancium tres sunt 
modi, pagani, Iudei, Christiani. Pagani sacriп¬Ғcant spiritibus aereis et ter-
reis et eos non constringunt, (пңұпң·) set п¬Ғngunt spiritus se constringi per 
verba legis eorum, ut ydolis п¬Ғdem adhibeant et ad veram п¬Ғdem nullatenus 
convertantur. (пңұпңё) Et quia п¬Ғdem malam habent;opera eorum nulla. Et qui 
per talia experimenta operari voluerit, Dominum Deum suum dimittat et 
derelinquat et spiritibus sacriп¬Ғcet et ydolis п¬Ғdem adhibeat, (пңұпң№) quia п¬Ғdes 
operatur in homine, sive bona fuerit sive mala, unde in Evangelio: вҖңFides 
tua te salvam fecit.вҖқ
(пңІпң°) Iudei in hac visione nullatenus operantur, quia per adventum 
Christi donum amiserunt, nec possunt in celis collocari testante Domino, 
(пңІпңұ) qui dicit: вҖңQui baptizatus non fuerit condempnabitur,вҖқ et sic in omni-
bus angelis operantur imperfecte. (пңІпңІ) Nec per invocaciones suas veniunt 
ad eп¬Җectum, nisi Christo п¬Ғdem adhibeant, quia dictum est eis per prophe-
tam: (пңІпңі) вҖңQuando venit rex regum et dominus dominancium, cessabit 
unccio vestra,вҖқ que nuncquam cessaret, si per hanc artem haberet eп¬ғca-
ciam veram, et sic opera eorum nulla. (пңІпңҙ) Et quamvis Iudei, in quantum 
Iudei, a Deo sunt condempnati, tamen summum adorant creatorem set 
indebito modo. (пңІпңө) Tamen virtute sanctorum Dei nominum coguntur 
venire spiritus, set quia Iudei non signantur signo Domini, scilicet crucis et 
п¬Ғdei, nolunt spiritus veraciter eis respondere.


--- PAGE 64 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
63
(13) Yet because the soul of man was formed with the angels, awaiting 
with them to be happily rewarded by the gift and grace of the Saviour, (14) he 
is able to truly look at the most high Majesty face to face while alive and to 
praise God along with them (the angels), and recognize his Creator. (15) And 
that knowledge is not to recognize God in his greatness and might, except in 
that manner by which Adam and the prophets recognized him. 
(16) But this should principally be observed, that there are three types of 
people who perform this art: pagans, Jews, and Christians. 
The pagans sacrifice to the aerial and earthly spirits, and do not bind 
them, (17) but the spirits pretend themselves to be confined by the words 
of their law, in order that they have faith in idols, and never be converted to 
the true faith. (18) And because they adhere to a false faith, their works are 
invalid. And he that wishes to perform such experiments must abandon and 
forsake the Lord their God and sacrifice to the spirits and put faith in idols, 
(19) because faith works in man, whether good or evil, from which the Gospel 
says: вҖңYour faith has made you well.вҖқ7
(20) Jews can in nowise work to obtain this vision, because with the 
arrival of Christ they have lost the gift, nor can they be stationed in heaven 
as the Lord testified when he said: вҖңWhomever has been baptized will not 
be condemned,вҖқ8 and so they work imperfectly with all angels. (22) Nor will 
their invocations be effective, unless they put their faith in Christ, because it 
was said through the prophet: (23) вҖңWhen the king of kings and lord of lords 
comes, your anointing will cease,вҖқ9 which should never have ceased, if they 
could have true effectiveness through this art, and thus their works are null. 
(24) And although the Jews, as they are Jews, have been condemned by God, 
yet they honor the most high Creator, but in an improper manner. (25) Yet 
with the power of the holy names of God, the spirits are compelled to come, 
but because the Jews are marked not with the Sign of the Lord, namely of the 
cross and of the faith, the spirits are unwilling to answer them truly.
7 Luke 17:19. In the parallel text in SSM L.4.f.49, the main target of derision is Islam. See 
Veenstra 2012 pp. 188вҖ“189 n62.
8 Compare Mark 16:16: вҖңHe who believes and is baptised shall be saved, but he who 
believes not shall be condemned.
9 Widely cited by church writers, and attributed to Daniel, the actual source of this 
quotation seems to be the pseudo-Augustinian sermon вҖңAgainst the Jews, Pagans, and 
Arians.вҖқ See Fanger 2012 pp. 203вҖ“204, p. 215 n29. See also Mesler, 2012, p. 118, 139 notes 
42вҖ“46.


--- PAGE 65 ---
sworn book of honorius
64
(пңІпң¶) Solus igitur Christianus potest in hac visione et in omnibus aliis 
veraciter operari. (пңІпң·) Et quamvis per hanc artem magicam trium homi-
num genera operentur, non credendum est, quod in hoc nomine вҖңmagusвҖқ 
debeat malum includi. (пңІпңё) Nam magus per se philosophus Grece, Hebraice 
scriba, Latine sapiens dicitur. Sic ars magica a вҖңmagosвҖқ dicitur, quod est 
вҖңsapiens,вҖқ et вҖң-ycos,вҖқ quod est вҖңsciencia,вҖқ (пңІпң№) quasi вҖңsciencia sapientum,вҖқ 
cum in ipsa eп¬ғciatur homo sapiens, et per hanc sciuntur omnia presencia, 
preterita et futura.
Primum opus vel tractatus.
IV De composicione sigilli Dei vivi et veri. 
Primo fac unum circulum, cuius diameter sit trium digitorum propter tres 
clavos Domini vel пңө propter quinque plagas vel пң· propter пң· sacramenta vel 
пң№ propter пң№ ordines angelorum; set communiter пңө digitorum п¬Ғeri solet. 
(пңІ) Deinde infra illum circulum fac alium circulum a primo distantem 
duobus granis ordei propter duas tabulas Moysi vel distantem a primo tri-
bus granis propter trinitatem personarum.
(пңі) Deinde infra illos duos circulos in superiori parte, que dicitur angu-
lus meridiei, fac unam crucem, cuius tibia aliquantulum intret circulum 
interiorem.
(пңҙ) Deinde a parte dextra crucis scribe hвҖ”aspiracionemвҖ”deinde t, 
deinde o, deinde e. x. o. r. a. b. a. l. a. y. q. c. i. y. s. t. a. l. g. a. <a>. o. n. o. s. 
u. l. a. r. i. t. e. k. s. p. f. y. o. m. o. m. a. n. a. r. e. m. i. a. r. e. l. a. t. e. d. a. c. 
o. n. o. n. a. o. y. l. e. y. o. t.
(пңө) Et iste litere sint eque distantes et circumdent circulum. eo ordine, 
quo sunt prenominate, et sic magnum nomen Domini вҖңSemenphorasвҖқ lxxii 
literarum erit completum.
(пң¶) Hoc facto in medio circulorum, scilicet in centro, fac unum pen-
tagonum talem: вҳ…, in cuius medio sit signum вҖңtauвҖқ tale: 
, et supra illud 
signum scribe nomen Dei вҖңElвҖқ et sub nomen aliud Dei, scilicet вҖңEly,вҖқ isto 
modo: 


