SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii — the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 17/28  |  CHARS: 381465-406132 of 659348
============================================================

ine, de absolucione 
peccatorum, de conﬁrmacione non irruendi in peccatum mortale, de 
redempcione trium animarum de purgatorio est cathezizandum, () quo-
niam si aliquid istorum  volueris, fac sicut dictum est de divina visione 
mutando verumptamen peticionem visionis in peticionem cognicionis 
potestatis divine () vel absolucionis peccatorum vel conﬁrmacionis in 
gracia immobiliter vel redempcionis trium animarum de purgatorio, set 
sic procul dubio similiter et adhuc facilius optinebis.


--- PAGE 196 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
195
value, if human reasoning can provide experimental proof,”191 for that reason 
it is most difficult for one to perceive the Divine Majesty.
(54) In this work one must not think about death, because with the vir-
tue of prayer and the virtue of God, in whom he has placed all his trust, the 
body becomes like a spiritual body, and is nourished by heavenly food, (55) 
as young ravens are, when nourished by the mercy of God, as David testified 
when he said, “he gives his food to beasts, and to young ravens who cry out.”192
(56) But the operator must beware, lest he is in mortal sin, because if so, 
he will go insane, and the cause is that, comprehension comes from part of the 
soul, which strives to see what it delights in, (57) and when he doesn’t see it 
because of the hindrance of sin, henceforth will think of nothing else, and so 
the body will have no human reasoning. (58) And similarly we see many who 
become inanimate thereby, because the comprehension coming from part 
of the soul has not reached its wishes. (59) May the Divine Power therefore 
grant us the grace to achieve the divine vision, who lives and reigns in trinity 
through all the ages of the ages. Amen.
CII. The topics of the first book.
Having examined the divine vision, we have also examined understanding of 
divine power, the absolution of sins, confirmation against mortal sin, and the 
redemption of three souls from purgatory, (2) because if you wish to accom-
plish any of those four, do as said regarding the divine vision, but simply 
change the petition to “understanding of divine power (3) or “absolution of 
sins” or “confirmation in perpetual grace” or “the redemption of three souls 
from purgatory,” and so without doubt you will more easily achieve them 
similarly. 
191 St. Gregory, Homilies on the Gospels, number 26. Also quoted by Thomas Aquinas 
in Summa Theologica question 1, art. 8.
192 Ps. 147:6 (KJV).


--- PAGE 197 ---
sworn book of honorius
196
() Et nota, quod, si vis, in omnibus predictis potes qualibet die dicere 
predictos  terminos cum illis  oracionibus, que sunt , , , , , 
, , , , , () quia in eis non oportet respicere diem neque lunacio-
nem neque de necessitate horam, licet presertim circa mane, circa terciam 
circaque meridiem proferantur, () unde iste oraciones reducunt in bonum 
quicquid homo erravit per fragilitatem in operacione, et quanto plus et fre-
quencius dicuntur, tanto magis erratum corrigitur et errandum prohibetur. 
CIII Incipit secundus tractatus libri sacri. 
Expleto primo tractatu huius libri sacri et Domini secreti subditur secun-
dus, qui, sicut primus  capitula habebat, de quibus Hely gracia est deser-
tum, ita iste  habet, scilicet hec: 
() De cognicione celorum; 
De cognicione angelorum cuiuslibet celi; 
De cognicione cuiuslibet angeli et nominis et potestatis eius; 
De cognicione sigillorum cuiuslibet angeli et virtutis eorum; 
() De cognicione superiorum cuiuslibet angeli; 
De cognicione oﬃcii cuiuslibet angeli; 
De invocacione et associacione cuiuslibet angeli; 
De impetracione voluntatis per quemlibet angelum; 
() De impetracione omnium scienciarum;
De hora mortis scienda; 
De omnibus presentibus, preteritis et futuris sciendis; 
De cognicione planetarum et stellarum; 
() De cognicione virtutum planetarum et stellarum et quid habent 
inﬂuere; 
De inﬂuenciis planetarum [et stellarum] mutandis; 
De mutacione noctis in diem et diei in noctem; 
() De cognicione spirituum ignis et nominum et superiorum et sigil-
lorum et potestatum et virtutum eorum; 


--- PAGE 198 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
197
(4) And note that, if you wish, for all those preceding things, on any day 
you can say the preceding eight Termini (or “ends”) with these ten prayers, 
which are 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32 (5) because with them it is not 
necessary to consider the day of the week, nor the lunation, nor the hour; 
it is permitted to offer them especially in the morning, around terce, and 
around noon, (6) whereby any faults in the operation can be corrected by 
these prayers, and the more times and more often they are said, the better the 
error will be corrected and further errors prevented.
CIII. Here begins the  
Second Treatise of the Sacred Book.
Having completed the first treatise of this Sacred Book and secrets of the 
Lord, here follows the second, which, just as the first had six topics completed 
with the grace of HELY, so this one has twenty-seven topics as follows:
1. (2) Concerning the knowledge of the Heavens; 
2. Concerning the knowledge of the angels of each of the Heavens; 
3. Concerning the knowledge of each angel’s name and powers; 
4. Concerning the knowledge of the seals of each angel, and their virtues; 
5. (3) Concerning the knowledge of the superiors of each angel; 
6. To know the office of any angel;
7. Regarding the invocation of any angel, and associating with them; 
8. To obtain your wishes through any angel; 
(4) 9. To obtain all knowledge; 
10. To know the hour of death; 
11. To know all things past, present, and future; 
12. To know the planets and stars; 
(5) 13. To know the virtues of the planets and stars and their influences; 
14. To change the influences of the planets [and stars]; 
15. To change night into day and day into night; 
(6) 16. To know the spirits of the fire, their names, superiors, seals, pow-
ers, and virtues; 


--- PAGE 199 ---
sworn book of honorius
198
De cognicione spirituum et animalium aeris; De cognicione nominum 
et virtutum et superiorum eorum; 
() De cognicione sigillorum et virtutum eorum; 
De cognicione mixtionis et transmutacionis elementorum et corpo-
rum ex hiis mixtorum; 
() De cognicione omnium herbarum et plantarum et omnium anima-
lium existencium super terram et virtutum eorum; 
De cognicione humane nature et omnium factorum hominum, que 
sunt abscondita et ignota; 
() De cognicione aquaticorum spirituum et animalium et virtutum 
eorum et superiorum eorum; 
De cognicione terrenorum et infernorum spirituum; 
() De visione purgatorii et inferni et cognicione animarum ibidem 
existencium; 
De ablacione22 corporis vel anime revocanda;
De consecracione huius libri.
CIV Hic tractat de natura et oﬃcio horum angelorum. 
Completo de visione divina et novem ordinum angelorum de secundis 
angelis incipiamus tractatum, quorum natura talis est, quod serviunt Deo 
per prius et naturatis per posterius. () Homines et eorum naturam dili-
gunt regnantque in speris stellarum. Corpus igneum accipiunt, quando ad 
mandatum Domini hominibus mundatis et puriﬁcatis tamquam sociando, 
ut eos consolentur, mittuntur. () Et istorum sunt  modi, de quibus debet 
natura precognosci, quoniam quilibet suum proprium habet oﬃcium pre-
destinatum, quamvis omnibus aliis serviciis possent deservire. 
 SSM: obligatione, which is also reflected in R.


--- PAGE 200 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
199
[17.  To know their seals] and virtues.
18. To know the spirits and creatures of the air;193 knowing their names, 
powers, and their superiors;
(7) 19. To know the seals and their virtues;
20. To know the mixture and transmutation of the elements and of the 
bodies mixed from these; 
(8) 21. To know all herbs and plants, and of all animals existing on the 
earth, and their virtues; 
22. To know human nature and all the deeds of mankind, which are hid-
den and unknown; 
(9) 23. To know the aquatic spirits and animals, and of their virtues, and 
their superiors;
24. To know the earthly and infernal spirits; 
(10) 25. Concerning the vision of Purgatory and Hell, and acquiring 
knowledge of the souls therein. 
26. Concerning the removal of the body or the restoration of the soul.194
27. Concerning the consecration of this book.
CIV. Here we treat of the natures and offices of these angels.
Having completed the discussion on the divine vision, and the nine orders 
of angels, we now commence a treatise on the second type of angels, whose 
nature is that they serve God first, and created things second. (2) They love 
men and their nature, and reign in the spheres of the stars. They take a fiery 
body, when they are sent according to the Lord’s mandate to people, in order 
to comfort them, being cleansed and purified for associating with them. 
(3) And there are seven categories of them, from which their nature can be 
known beforehand, because each has its own predestined office, even though 
they may serve all other services as well.
193 Compare II.8.
194 Compare the list at the beginning of the book: de obligacione corporis et anime ad 
revertendum. 


--- PAGE 201 ---
sworn book of honorius
200
CV (De spiritibus Saturninis).
Istorum autem quidam sunt et vocantur Saturnini et isti sunt Bohel, 
Cafziel, Mich[r]athon, Satquiel, et eorum natura est tristicias et iras et 
odia promovere, nives et glacies concreare, () et sua corpora sunt longa 
et gracilia, pallida vel ﬂava, et sua regio est septemtrio, et habent sub se 
 demones, scilicet unum regem et  eius ministros, quibus omnes alii 
demones Saturnini subsunt. () Isti sunt Maymon rex, Assaibi, Albuna-
lich, Haibalidech, Yasﬂa, qui demones in ventis Aﬀrico subditis, qui sunt , 
Mextyura, Alchibany, Alﬂas, penantur23 vel requiescunt.
CVI De spiritibus Iovialibus.
Alii sunt Ioviales et sunt isti Satquiel, Raphael, Pahamcocihel, Asas-
saiel, et eorum natura est gaudium, amorem, leticiam, benivolenciam et 
graciam attribuere operanti omnium personarum, rores, ﬂores, herbas et 
folia procreare et amovere, () et sua regio est inter austrum et orientem, 
et habent  demones sub se, scilicet unum regem et tres eius ministros, 
quibus omnes alii demones Iovis subiugantur, et isti sunt Formione rex, 
Guth, Maguth et Guthryn, () qui demones in ventis boree subditis et 
subsolano, qui sunt , Harith, Iesse, Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob, penantur vel 
requiescunt. Sua corpora sunt medie stature, et colar eorum quasi color 
celi vel cristalli. 
 See GH’s note on “penantur,” p. .


--- PAGE 202 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
201
(CV.) (Concerning the Spirits of Saturn.)195
But of those certain ones are called Saturnians, and these are: Bohel, Cafziel, 
Michrathon, Satquiel [*Saterquiel],196 and their nature is to cause sadness, 
anger, and hatred, to create snow and ice together, (2) and their bodies are 
long and slender, pale or yellow, and their region is the North.197 
And five daemons are under these, namely one king and his four atten-
dants, with which all other daemons of Saturn are subjugated. (3) They are 
these: Maymon the king, Assaibi, Albunalich, Haibalidech, Yasfla, which 
daemons are subordinate to the Southwest Winds, which are three: Mexty-
ura, Alchibany, Alflas; they may be compelled to serve,198 or they rest.
CVI. Concerning the Spirits of Jupiter.
Others are Jovial and are these: Satquiel, Raphael, Pahamcocihel, Asas-
saiel, and their nature is joy, love, gladness, and grant favor and influence of 
all persons to the operator, and to produce or take away dews, flowers, herbs 
and leaves, (2) and their region is between the south and east, and four dae-
mons are under these, namely one king and his three attendants, with which 
all other daemons of Jupiter are subjugated, and they are Formione the king, 
Guth, Maguth, and Guthryn, (3) which three daemons are subject to the 
North and East winds, which are five: Harith, Iesse, Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob, 
they may be compelled to serve, or they rest. Their bodies are of medium stat-
ure, and their color is like the color of the sky, or of crystal. 
195 Compare chapters CV–CXI with a slightly more elaborate catalog of spirits in 
chapters CXIX-CXXVI.
196 Should probably read Saterquiel. Satquiel is one of the seven angels in the Sigillum 
Dei.
197 Note the natures of these planetary “angels” or “spirits” is similar but not identical to 
the natures of the aerial spirits or “daemons” which are given in CXIX–CXXVI.  SSM 
does not have exact parallels to these chapters, but rather “oblique correspondence.” The 
physical descriptions of the angels found here have parallels in SSM L.2.f.11 ff prayers to 
the planetary angels or spirits.
198 Regarding the problematic word “penantur” (here translated “compelled to serve”), 
see introduction, p. 41 and GH, p. 50. 


--- PAGE 203 ---
sworn book of honorius
202
CVII De spiritibus Martis.
Alii sunt Martis et sunt isti Samahel, Satihel, Yturahihel, Amabiel, et 
natura eorum est guerras, occisiones, destrucciones et mortalitates gen-
cium et omnium terrenorum provocare, et sua corpora sunt medie stat-
ure, sicca et macra. () Color eorum materialis est rubeus sicut carbones 
accensi bene rubei, et sua regio est austrum, et habent  demones sub 
se, scilicet unum regem et tres eius ministros, quibus omnes alii demo-
nes Martis totaliter subiugantur, () et isti sunt Iammax rex, Carmox, 
Ycanohl, Pasfran, qui demones in ventis subsolano subditis, qui sunt isti 
: Atraurbiabilis, Yachonaababur, Carmehal, Innyhal, Proathophas, 
penantur vel requiescunt.
CVIII De spiritibus Solaribus.
Alii sunt Solis et sunt isti Raphael, Cafhael, Dardihel, Hurathaphel, et 
eorum natura est amorem, graciam, divicias homini communicare et vir-
tutem, similiter sanum custodire, rores, herbas, ﬂores et fructus in instanti 
dare. () Corpora eorum magna et ampla, omnis benivolencie plena, color 
eorum lucidus vel citrinus sicut Sol vel aurum, et sua regio est oriens, et 
habent 4 demones sub se, scilicet unum regem et tres eius ministros, 
quibus omnes alii demones Solis subiugantur, (3) et isti sunt Barthan 
rex, Thaadas, Chaudas, Ialchal, qui demones in ventis boree subdi-
tis, qui sunt 4, Baxhathau, Gahathus, Caudes, Iarabal, penantur vel 
requiescunt. 
CIX De spiritibus Veneris 
Alii sunt Veneris et sunt isti Hanahel, Raquiel, Salguyel, et natura eorum 
est risus, lacivias, desideria in amorem conversa cum mulieribus, ﬂoribus 
et fructibus tribuere, () et corpora eorum sunt medie stature in omni-
bus, quia neque parva neque magna neque pinguia neque macra, et eorum 


--- PAGE 204 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
203
CVII. Concerning the Spirits of Mars.
Others are of Mars and are these: Samahel, Satihel, Yturahihel, Amabiel, 
and their nature is to provoke wars, murder, destruction, and mortality of 
people, and all earthly things, and their bodies are of medium stature, dry and 
thin. (2) The color of their material is red, such as red-hot coals kindled well, 
and their region is the South.
And four daemons are under these, namely one king and his three min-
isters, to whom all other daemons of Mars are subjugated, (3) and they are 
these: Iammax the king, Carmox, Ycanohl, Pasfran, which daemons are 
subject to the East winds, which are these five: Atraurbiabilis, Hyachonaa-
babur, Carmehal, Innyhal, Proathophas, they may be compelled to serve, 
or they rest.
CVIII. Concerning the Spirits of the Sun.
Others are of the Sun, and they are Raphael, Cafhael, Dardihel, 
Hurathaphel,199 and their nature is provide love, gratitude, and wealth to 
man, and virtue, similarly to guard his health, and to instantly give dew, herbs, 
flowers, and fruits. (2) Their bodies are great and large, and full of all benevo-
lence. Their colors are bright or citrus, or like the Sun or gold, and their region 
is the East. 
And four daemons are under them, namely one king and three of his min-
isters, to whom all other daemons of the Sun are subjugated, (3) and they are 
these: Barthan the king, Thaadas, Chaudas, Ialchal, and those daemons are 
subject to the North winds, which are four: Baxhathau, Gahathus, Caudes, 
Iarabal, they may be compelled to serve, or they rest. 
CIX. Concerning the Spirits of Venus.
Others are of Venus, and they are these: Hanahel, Raquiel, Salguyel, and 
their nature is to cause laughter, lust, desire, and to turn women to love, and 
to give flowers and fruit. (2) Their bodies are of medium stature in all ways, 
because they are neither small nor large, nor fat nor thin, and their form is 
199 In CXXXIII.27 these are spelled Raphael, Caphael, Dardiel, and Hurathaphel; 
SSM:  Raphael, Caphael, Dardyel, Huracaphel.


--- PAGE 205 ---
sworn book of honorius
204
forma est graciosa, alba sicut nix. () Sua regio est inter austrum et occi-
dentem,  et habent  demones sub se, unum regem et duos eius ministros, 
quibus omnes alii demones Veneris subiugantur, () et isti sunt Sarabocres 
rex, Nassar, Cynassa, qui demones in ventis subsolano et zephiro subditis, 
qui sunt , scilicet Cambores, Trachathath, Nassar, Naasa, penantur vel 
requiescunt. 
CX De spiritibus Mercurii 
Alii sunt Mercurii et sunt isti Mychael, Myhel, Sarapiel, et eorum 
natura est bonos, eciam se ipsos, <in> aliis subiugare. () Respondent de 
preteritis, presentibus et futuris. Docent secreta facta vel facienda, que 
debent accidere in hoc mundo. Revelant secreta omnium aliorum. () Pos-
sunt eciam facere, quando eis coniunguntur, penitus quod hii possunt, 
et ipsi una cum Luna referunt consilia secretorum omnium aliorum, et 
sua forma est mobilis, clara ad modum vitri vel ﬂamme ignis albe. () Sua 
regio est inter occidentem et septemtrionem, et habent 5 demones sub se, 
unum regem et 4 eius ministros, quibus omnes alii demones Mercurii 
subiugantur, (5) et isti sunt Habaa rex, Hyyci, Quyron, Zach, Eladeb, 
<eladab>, qui demones in ventis zephiro et Affrico subditis, qui sunt 
4, scilicet Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Sambas, penantur vel requiescunt. 
CXI De spiritibus Lune 
Alii sunt Lune et sunt isti Gabriel, Michael, Samyel, Atithael, et eorum 
natura est voluntates et cogitaciones mutare, itinera properare, verba 
referre, pluvias provocare. () Sua corpora sunt longa et ampla. Sua forma 
est obscura et alba sicut cristallus vel ensis furbitus vel sicut glacies vel 
nubes obscura. () Sua regio est occidens, et habent  demones sub se, 
unum regem et tres eius ministros, quibus omnes alii demones Lune obe-
diunt et eciam supponuntur, () et isti sunt Harthan rex, Bileth, Milalu, 
Abucaba, qui demones in ventis zephiro subditis, [qui] sunt , Hebethel, 
Amochap, Oylol, Milau, Abuchaba, penantur vel requiescunt. 


--- PAGE 206 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
205
agreeable, and is as white as snow. (3) Their region is between the south and 
the west.
And there are three daemons under them, one king, and his two minis-
ters, and all the other daemons of Venus are subject to these, (4) and they are: 
Sarabocres the king, Nassar, Cynassa, which rule the daemons of the East 
and West winds [sic], which are four, namely Cambores, Trachathath, Nas-
sar, and Naasa; they may be compelled to serve, or they rest. 
CX. Concerning the Spirits of Mercury.
Others are of Mercury, and they are these: Mychael, Myhel, Sarapiel, and 
their nature is to subjugate themselves and other good spirits to others. (2) 
They give answer regarding the past, present, and future. They teach the 
secret deeds or doings, which must come to pass in this world. They reveal the 
secrets of all of the others. (3) They can also, when constrained, do what the 
others can do, and together with the moon they can reveal the secret councils 
of all the others, and their forms are changeable, clear like glass, or like a flame 
of white fire. (4) Their region is between the west and the north. 
And there are five daemons under them: one king, and his four ministers, 
to which all other daemons of Mercury are subjugated, (5) and they are these: 
Habaa the king, Hyyci, Quyron, Zach, Eladeb, which rule the daemons 
of the West and Southwest winds, which are four, namely: Zobha, Drohas, 
Palas, Sambas, they may be compelled to serve, or they rest. 
CXI. Concerning the Spirits of the Moon.
Others are of the Moon, and they are these: Gabriel, Michael, Samyel, Ati-
thael, and their nature is to move the will and thinking, to speed journeys, to 
recall words, and to cause it to rain. (2) Their bodies are long and large. Their 
forms are dark and white like crystal or of a burnished sword, or like ice or 
dark clouds. (3) Their region is the West. 
And there are four daemons under them: a king and his three ministers, 
and all the other daemons of the moon are obedient to those, and placed 
under them, (4) and they are these: Harthan, the king, Bileth, Milalu, Abu-
caba, which rule the daemons of the West winds, which are five: Hebethel, 
Amochap, Oylol, Milau, Abuchaba; they may be compelled to serve, or 
they rest. 


--- PAGE 207 ---
sworn book of honorius
206
CXII Formacio circuli
Habita igitur eorum secundum naturam, dominium, regionem et formam 
cognicione debita dum eos invocare volueris, sic facies. () Accipe lapides 
duros et equales, in quibus non sint foramina vel ruptura, vel tegulas spe-
cialiter ad hoc factas. () Operans vero sit a pollucione purgatus et habeat 
calcem et arenam litoris mixtam, cum quibus lapides vel tegule coniun-
gantur. 
() Tunc ﬁet ex eis locus, in quo protrahetur circulus, et iste locus tali-
ter formabitur. Primo ﬁet circulus equalis terre habens in longitudine et 
latitudine  pedes, () infra quem ﬁat circulus gibbosus ad modum semicir-
culi, alcior quam sit alter, in longitudine et latitudine continens  pedes et 
in altitudine tres pedes cum dimidio. () Tamen paupertatis oppressio per-
mittit locum hunc de terra munda ﬁeri, si optime decoquatur, dum tamen 
ibi non fuerit disiunctura. 
() Peracto vero loco circuli operans, ut diximus, sit mundatus, ut in 
prima mundicia continetur. Set mutetur peticio questionum sic. Sacerdos, 
dum conﬁcit corpus Christi, dicat: 
() O 
“Tu, Domine Iesu Christe, Deus et homo, qui voluisti per te ipsum ﬁdelem 
populum tuum medicabiliter visitare, te suppliciter exoro, precor et pos-
tulo temet ipsum, () quem nunc hic in manibus meis teneo pro famulo 
tuo N, ut ex dono ac permissione gracie tue omnes illos angelos, quos invo-
caverit, () ut per eos benigniter consulatur, sibi mittere ac constringere 
digneris, ut te mediante possit cum ipsis misericorditer consociari.”


--- PAGE 208 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
207
CXII. Construction of the Circle.
Having therefore due knowledge of their nature, dominion, region, and form, 
when you wish to call upon them, you should do thus: (2) Take hard and 
uniform stones, which have no holes or cracks, or otherwise you can use tiles 
made specifically for this purpose. (3) And the one who makes them must be 
purified from all defilement. And he should have a mixture of lime and beach 
sand, with which to mortar the stones or tiles together. 
(4) Then make a place from them in which to draw the circle, and that 
place should be formed in the following manner: First, let the circle be level 
with the ground, and nine200 feet in width, (5) below which make a humped 
circle (i.e. a mound) like a semi-circle, higher than the other, seven feet in 
length and width and in height three and a half feet.201 (6) Yet in the case of 
extreme poverty, this place can be made (paved) with clean earth (or clay), if 
it is thoroughly boiled, as long as it is not about to fall apart.
(7) The place for the circle having been duly finished, as we have said, it 
should be cleaned, as described for the first cleaning. But the petition should 
be changed thus. The priest, while consecrating the body of Christ, should 
say: 
(8) Prayer.
“You, O Lord Jesus Christ, God and man, who wished to visit your faithful 
people in person, for their healing, I humbly beseech you, I pray and ask you, 
even your own self (9) which I now hold in my hands, for the sake of your 
servant N., that from the gift and permission of your grace, all those angels 
which he shall call upon (10) graciously for council, may you deign to send 
and constrain them, so that with your mediation he may be able to associate 
with them mercifully.”
200 SSM L.3.f.2: ten feet. R reads “in length and breadth 14 feet.” S3: “4or pedes.”
201 R seems to interpret this second circle or mound as being within the first, but rather 
it seems to be outside the first, and a place for the spirits to appear. Compare below where 
the terrestrial spirits are evoked, where a pit is dug apart from the operator’s circle of 
protection.


