SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii — the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 7/28  |  CHARS: 140745-165745 of 659348
============================================================

tes the seven twofold events, 
and whose third designates the seven sacraments.
V. Having considered the composition of the Seal of the  
living God, which is necessary for seeing the divine  
vision, we will now proceed to that topic.
First he must perform true penance and confession. He must separate him-
self from women, and from seeing them. (2) For as Solomon said: “It is safer 
to dwell with a she-bear and a lion in its den than to abide with a wicked 
12 See chap. XCIX.2 for full text.


--- PAGE 79 ---
sworn book of honorius
78
et inﬁrmis separetur. Nam dicitur in Psalmo: “Cum sancto sanctus eris, et 
cum viro iniquo iniqus eris.”
() Vitam suam munde deducat, quia dicitur: “Beati immaculati in via, 
qui ambulant in lege Domini.” Vestimenta eius non sint fetida, immo nova 
vel mundissime lota. () Et intendit Salomon vestimenta nova virtutes esse, 
quia Deus nec beati angeli de mundanis curant. Ex hoc patet, quod pau-
peres cicius et verius operantur quam divites. () Set in operacione subse-
quenti istorum angelorum istud convenit, quia habitant cum hominibus 
et sunt mundi. Ideo mundas vestes appetunt, et ideo Salomon generaliter 
loquebatur.
() Nuncquam aliquis, dum hoc facere voluerit, sit ociosus, ne cicius 
decidat cor suum ad peccatum. Nam dicitur: “Semper aliquid agite, ne oci-
osi inveniamini.” () Semper et continue roget Deum per has sanctissimas 
oraciones, que secuntur, quia dicitur: “Beatus servus, quem, cum venerit 
Dominus, invenerit vigilantem.”
VI P  
Acciones nostras, quesumus, Domine, aspirando preveni et adiuvando 
prosequere, ut cuncta nostra operacio a te semper incipiat, et per te incepta 
ﬁniatur, qui vivis et regnas per omnia secula seculorum. Amen. 


--- PAGE 80 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
79
woman.”13 He must also separate himself from evil and sick men. For he said 
in the Psalm: “With the holy you will be holy, and with the unjust you will 
be unjust.”14
(3) He must lead a clean life, because it is said: “Blessed are those whose 
ways are undefiled, who walk in the law of the Lord.”15 His garments must 
not be foul-smelling, but rather they must be new or very cleanly washed. (4) 
And by “new garments” Solomon means “of worth,” because neither God nor 
the blessed angel care anything about material things. From this it is seen, that 
the poor labor more quickly and truly (in this art) than the rich. (5) But in 
the following operation the same angels, who are pure, are assembled together 
with men. Therefore they greatly desire clean garments, and therefore Solo-
mon was speaking generally. 
(6) He who wishes to accomplish this work must never let himself 
be idle, lest his heart more quickly falls towards sin. For it is said: “Always 
strive for something, lest you are found idle.”16 (7) So you should continu-
ally pray to God through these most holy prayers which follow, because it is 
said: “Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he comes, shall be found 
vigilant.”17
VI. P .
“Direct, we beg you, O Lord, our actions by your holy inspirations, and carry 
them on by your gracious assistance, that every prayer and work of ours may 
begin always with you, and through you be happily ended, who lives and 
reigns through all the ages of the ages. Amen.”18
13 Paraphrasing Ecclesiasticus 25:16.
14 Ps. 18:26.
15 Ps. 119:1.
16 Paraphrased from Jerome, Epistolae, letter 125. See Mesler, 2012, p. 118 and p 139 n 41.
17 “Blessed is that servant....”: Matt. 24:46. R inserts a section on suffumigations and 
names of angels, largely drawn from Agrippa.
18 This prayer appears in the Liturgia Horarum (Liturgy of the Hours) and other medieval 
collections of prayers. A slightly different version is found in the Rituale Romanum 
(Roman Ritual). Other magic texts incorporate it as well, including the Book of Oberon, 
p. 51; Sloane 3851, fol. 2r; and Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites, p. 252.


--- PAGE 81 ---
sworn book of honorius
80
VII   
Ave, Maria, gracia plena. Dominus tecum. Benedicta tu in mulieribus, et 
benedictus fructus ventris tui. Mater Dei, ora pro nobis. Amen. 
VIII   
Salve, regina, mater misericordie, 
vita, dulcedo et spes nostra, salve. 
Ad te clamamus exules ﬁlii Eve. Ad te suspiramus gementes et ﬂentes
in hac lacrimarum valle. Eya! 
() Ergo, advocata nostra, 
illos tuos misericordes oculos ad nos converte, 
et Iesum, benedictum fructum ventris tui, 
nobis post hoc exilium ostende, 
o clemens, o pia, o dulcis Maria.
() Ora pro nobis, sancta Dei genitrix, ut digni eﬃciamur promissioni-
bus Christi. 
IX   
O gloriosa virgo semper Maria, mater glorie, mater ecclesie, mater pietatis 
et indulgencie, ave, carissima domina, semper virgo Maria, mater luminis, 
honor eternus, signum serenitatis. () Ave, piissima domina Maria, aula 
Dei, porta celi, sacrarium Spiritus sancti. Ave, piissima domina Maria, urna 
aurea, templum divinitatis, reclinatorium eterne pietatis. () Ave, clemen-
tissima domina Maria, decus virginum, domina gencium, regina angelo-
rum. Ave, amantissima domina Maria, fons ortorum, ablucio peccatorum, 
lavacrum animarum. () Ave, desideratissima domina Maria, mater orpha-
norum, mamilla parvulorum, consolàcio miserorum. Salve, sancta parens. 
Salve, sancta et immaculata virginitas assistens vultui Dei, memor esto 
nostre fragilitatis.


--- PAGE 82 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
81
VII. Prayer 2.
Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee. Blessed art thou amongst 
women and blessed is the fruit of thy womb, [Jesus. Holy Mary,] Mother of 
God, pray for us. Amen.
VIII. Prayer 3.
Hail holy queen, mother of mercy,
Hail our life, our sweetness, and our hope.
To you do we cry, poor banished children of Eve. To you do we send up 
our sighs, mourning, and weeping
in this valley of tears.
(2) Turn then, most gracious advocate
your eyes of mercy toward us.
And after this, our exile,
Show us the fruit of your womb, Jesus.
O clement, O loving, O sweet [virgin] Mary.
(3) Pray for us, Holy Mother of God
That we may be made worthy of the promises of Christ.19
IX. Prayer 4.
O glorious Mary, eternal virgin, glorious mother, mother of the church, 
mother of piety and leniency, hail, O dearest lady, Mary, eternal virgin, 
mother of light, the eternal honor, the image of serenity. (2) Hail, most pious 
lady Mary, the court of God, the gate of heaven, the shrine of the Holy Spirit. 
(3) Hail, most pious lady Mary, that vessel of gold, that temple of the divinity, 
cushion of eternal piety. Hail, most merciful lady Mary, the glory of maidens, 
the ruler of nations, the queen of the angels. Hail most loving lady Mary, over-
flowing fountain, the washing of sins, the refreshment of souls. (4) Hail, most 
desired lady Mary, mother of orphans, the breast of infants, comforter of the 
wretched. Hail, holy parent. Hail, holy and immaculate virgin, who stands 
near the face of God, mindful of our frailty. 
19  This is the well-known Salve Regina prayer (up to “O Sweet [virgin] Mary”) along 
with the standard response.


--- PAGE 83 ---
sworn book of honorius
82
() Salve, benignissima, salve, suavissima, salve, misericordissima. 
Propiciaberis, semper virgo benedicta et gloriosa semper virgo Maria, que 
virga sacratissima et Dei mater es piissima, maris stella clarissima.
() Salve, semper gloriosa, margarita preciosa, ﬁcus [*sicut], lilium, 
formosa, olens velut rosa. Alleluia! Dirige me in visione beata.
() Obsecro te, regina perhennis, sancta Maria, per amorem Patris et 
Filii et Spiritus sancti et per commendatum tibi celeste sacrarium et per 
multas miseraciones, quas fecit super me et super genus humanum, () et 
per virtutes et per misteria sancte crucis et per sanctos clavos ﬁxos in suas 
preciosas manus et pedes et per sancta  vulnera sui preciosi corporis et 
per precium sancti corporis sui, quo nos redemit in sancta cruce, () ut 
ores pro me et pro omnibus peccatis meis et necessitatibus anime et corpo-
ris mei ad dilectum ﬁlium tuum, ut me vivente ipsum videre et collaudare 
merear. Amen. 
X
Gaude, virgo immaculata, Dei genitrix. Gaudium michi dona. Gaude, 
que gaudium ab angelo suscepisti, et gaudium visionis divine michi dona. 
Gaude, que genuisti eterni luminis claritatem. () Gaude, Dei genitrix, et 
gaudium visionis divine michi dona, ut sublever de omnibus angustiis et 
tribulacionibus et viciis meis, que sunt in corde meo, et quero amplius, ut 
tecum sim a latere constans ad videndum me vivente Deum eternum. () 
Adoro te, sancta mater Domini nostri Iesu Christi, et laudo et magniﬁco te. 
Adoro altitudinem tuam.
Adoro castitatem et virginitatem tuam. Adoro pietatem et misericor-
diam tuam. () Adoro viscera beata tua, que portaverunt deum et homi-
nem. Adoro beatum uterum tuum, qui portavit Iesum Dominum. Adoro 
beata ubera tua, que lactaverunt salvatorem mundi. () Precor te, carissima 
semper virgo Maria, per amorem ﬁlii tui, Domini nostri Iesu Christi, ut 


--- PAGE 84 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
83
(5) Hail, most kind, hail, most agreeable, hail, most merciful. You will be 
propitiated, eternal virgin, blessed and glorious, ever chaste Mary, you who 
are the most hallowed virgin and blessed mother of God, brightest star of the 
sea.
(6) Hail, ever glorious, precious pearl, beautiful as the lily, fragrant as the 
rose.20 Hallelujah! Direct me in this blessed vision. 
(7) I entreat you, eternal queen, holy Mary, through the love of the Father, 
Son, and Holy Spirit, and through your trusted heavenly shrine, and through 
the great pities which you have made over me and over the human race, (8) 
and through the virtues and through the solemn mysteries of the cross, and 
through the holy nails fastened to his precious hands and feet, and through 
the five sacred wounds to his precious body, where he redeemed us on the 
holy cross, (9) in order that you may plead to your beloved son on my behalf, 
and on behalf of all my sins, and for the needs of my soul and of my body, in 
order that I, while yet living, may be worthy to see and praise you. Amen.
X.
Rejoice,21 O immaculate virgin, mother of God. Give me joy. Rejoice, you 
who received the tidings of joy from the angel, and give me the joy of the 
vision of God. Rejoice, you who brought forth the clarity of eternal light. (2) 
Rejoice, mother of God, and give me the joy of the vision of God, that I may 
be raised up from all my difficulties and tribulations and the faults which are 
in my heart, and I ask further, that I may be firmly by your side, for seeing 
the living and eternal God. (3) I adore you, O holy mother of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and I praise and glorify you. I adore your exaltation. 
I adore your chastity and virginity. I adore your piety and your mercy. (4) 
I adore your blessed innermost parts, which have born God and Man. I adore 
your blessed womb, which has born Lord Jesus. I adore your blessed breasts, 
which have nursed the savior of the world. (5) I beg of you, dearest Mary ever 
virgin, through the love of your son our Lord Jesus Christ, to intervene for 
me, a sinner, that I may have the vision of the eternal God while yet alive, and 
20 Compare Francisco Guerrero’s (1528–1599) most famous work: “Ave virgo santissima, 
Dei mater piissima, maris stella clarissima / Salve semper gloriosa, margarita pretiosa, sicut 
lilium formosa, nitens, olens velut rosa.” It was evidently based on an older text.
21 This is an adaptation of the popular eighth century Anthem of the Blessed Virgin, also 
known as the Five Gaude antiphon.


--- PAGE 85 ---
sworn book of honorius
84
intercedas pro me peccatore ad visionem Dei eterni me vivente habendam 
et succurras michi in omnibus angustiis et necessitatibus meis et ne dere-
linquas me, (6) neque sim sine adiutorio in hac visione beata neque in illo 
tremendo die, cum exierit anima mea de corpore meo, aut in illa mirabili 
hora, cum rapta fuerit ad videndum me vivente Deum eternum.
(7) Postulo, graciosa, me ad portas paradisi facere venire, ut merear 
videre ibi filium tuum et merear habere leticiam sempiternam visionis 
divine cum ipso filio tuo gloriosissimo, qui vivit et regnat per omnia secula 
seculorum. Amen. 
XI  
Ego peccator indignus ad laudem et honorem gloriosissime semperque 
virginis Marie, genitricis Domini nostri Iesu Christi, eius sacra nomina, 
cum sim indignus, iuxta meum exiguum sensum Spiritu sancto dictante 
nominare curo.
(2) O gloriosa Dei genitrix, semper virgo Maria, ne indigneris con-
tra me nequissimum et innumerabili iniquitate plenum set accipe propi-
cia misericorditer quod indignus ad honorem tuum offero et affecto. (3) 
Etenim, piissima, sacra tua nomina corde, ore, opere distinte nominare et 
exaltare volo.
Nominaris namque Maria, Genitrix, Mater, Sponsa, Filia, Theotan, 
Virga, Vas, Balsamus, Nubes, Ros, (4) Pacifica, Princeps, Regina, Aurora, 
Imperatrix, Domina, Ancilla, Ortus, Fons, Puteus, Via, Vita, Semita, Splen-
dor, Stella aurea, Lumen, Luna, Fenestra vitrea, Ianua, Porta, Velum, Cella, 
(5) Domus, Hospicium, Capsa, Templum, Aula, Tabernaculum, Manna, 
Civitas, Liber, Stola, Flumen, Pons, Uva, Malogranatum, Femina, Nutrix, 
Mulier, Turris, Navis, Redemptrix, Liberatrix, Amica, (6) Thalamus, Val-
lis, Cinamomum, Turtur, Columba, Lilium, Rosa, Consolacio, Portus, Spes, 
Salus, Gloria, Fundamentum, vera peccatorum Medicina, Sacrarium Spiri-
tus sancti, Radix Iesse, Antitodum, Recreatrix, Syon, Puella, Miseratrix. 


--- PAGE 86 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
85
assist me in all my difficulties and needs, and do not abandon me,22 (6) so I 
may not be without help in this blessed vision nor on that terrible day when 
my soul departs from my body, or in that wonderful hour, when it will be 
dragged away, for seeing the living eternal God. 
(7) I graciously ask you to make me come to the gates of Paradise, that 
I may be worthy to see your son there, and that I may be worthy to have the 
wondrous eternal divine vision, with your most glorious son himself, who 
lives and reigns world without end. Amen.
XI. Prayer 5.
I, an unworthy sinner, for the praise and honor of the most glorious and eter-
nal virgin Mary, mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, of his sacred names, since I 
am unworthy, because of my meager perception I take care to name with the 
Holy Spirit’s command. 
(2) O glorious mother of God, O eternal virgin Mary, do not deem me 
unworthy because of my great wickedness and innumerable iniquities, but 
mercifully and favorably accepting that which I, although unworthy, offer 
and desire for your honor. (3) And so I wish to clearly name and exalt your 
holy names most conscientiously, with my heart, with my mouth, and with 
my labor.
So you are named Mary, Creator, Mother, Bride, Daughter, Theotan, 
Rod, Vessel, Balsamus, Cloud, Dew, (4) Peace Maker, the First, Queen, 
Dawn, Empress, Lady, Handmaiden, Risen, the Spring, the Well, the Way, 
the Life, the Path, the Brilliance, the Golden Star, the Light, the Moon, 
Glass Window, the Doorway, the Gate, the Curtain, the Chamber, (5) the 
Home, Guest Room, the Receptacle, the Temple, the Hall, the Tabernacle, 
the Manna, Community, Free, the Stole, the River, the Bridge, the Grape, the 
Pomegranate, Female, Nurse, Woman, Tower, Ship, Redemptress, Liberator, 
Friend, (6) the Bedroom, the Vally, Cinnamon, the Turtle-dove, the Dove, 
the Lily, the Rose, the Consolation, the Refuge, the Hope, the Salvation, the 
Glory, the Foundation, the True Medicine of Sinners, the Shrine of the Holy 
Spirit, the Root of Jesse,  the Antidote, the Recreatrix, Sion, the Girl, She who 
is Compassionate.
22 Compare Ps. 37:22–23; BoO, p. 100.


--- PAGE 87 ---
sworn book of honorius
86
() Tuam deprecor sanctissimam misericordiam, ut per hec divina tua 
nomina, que ego nunc tibi plenus immundicia coram altari tuo de te pre-
sumendo optuli, () ut in hac hora me audias et insaciabiliter digneris me 
facere videre atque laudare te et tuum ﬁlium gloriosum corpusculo meo 
vivente.
() Teque interpello, gloriosa, per tuum ﬁlium, quem concepisti, quem 
genuisti, quem peperisti, quem in carne lactasti, quem in balneo misisti, 
quem pannis involvisti, quem in templo presentasti, () quem predican-
tem audisti, quem in cruce pro nobis suspensum vidisti, quem mortuum 
et sepultum inspexisti, quem surgentem a mortuis scivisti, quem ad celum 
ascendentem ad Patrem vidisti, () et inde venturus est iudicare vivos et 
mortuos et seculum per ignem, per ipsum quoque pollutus labiis, pollutus 
carne, pollutus corpore, pollutus mente [te] ausus nominare imploro, () 
quatinus in hoc opere te et sanctam trinitatem cum sanctis angelis tuis 
facias me aspicere et videre et in extremo magno iudicio ab eternali pena 
eripias per Christum, Dominum nostrum. Amen.
XII []  
Credo in Deum, Patrem omnipotentem, creatorem celi et terre, et in Iesum 
Christum, ﬁlium eius unicum, Dominum nostrum, qui conceptus est de 
Spiritu sancto, natus ex Maria virgine, passus sub Poncio Pilato, cruciﬁxus, 
mortuus et sepultus. () Descendit ad inferna, tercia die resurrexit a mor-
tuis, ascendit ad celos, sedet ad dexteram Dei Patris omnipotentis, inde 
venturus est iudicare vivos et mortuos. () Credo in Spiritum sanctum, 
sanctam ecclesiam catholicam, sanctorum communionem, remissionem 
peccatorum, carnis resurreccionem et vitam eternam. Amen.
XIII   
Quicumque vult salvus esse et visionem Dei habere, ante omnia opus est, 
ut teneat catholicam ﬁdem, quam nisi quisque integram inviolatamque 


--- PAGE 88 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
87
(7) I beg for your most holy compassion, that through these divine names 
of yours, which I, though full of filth, have now dared to offer before your 
altar, (8) that you hear me in this hour, and deign to make me insatiably wor-
thy to see and praise you and your glorious son, while my insignificant body 
is still living.
(9) And I address you, O glorious one, through your son, whom you 
conceived, whom you begat, whom you have borne, whose body you nursed, 
whom you bathed, whom you wrapped in cloths, whom you presented at the 
temple, (10) whose preaching you heard, whose suspension from the cross on 
our behalf you saw, whose death and burial you witnessed, whose rising from 
the dead you observed, whose ascension to the Father in heaven you saw, (11) 
and who will soon return from there to judge the living and the dead and the 
world by fire, likewise through him I dare to name [you] and beg for help, 
with impure lips, with impure flesh, with impure body, with impure mind, 
(12) that through this work you will enable me to look at and see yourself, and 
the holy Trinity, with your holy angels, and in the end at the Great Judgement 
you will snatch me away from eternal punishment, through Christ our Lord. 
Amen.
XII. Prayer 6. [The Creed].23
I believe in God, the Father Almighty, Creator of heaven and earth, and in 
Jesus Christ, his only Son, our Lord: who was conceived by the Holy Spirit, 
born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died, 
and was buried; (2) he descended into hell; the third day he rose again from 
the dead; he ascended into heaven; sits at the right hand of God the Father 
Almighty; from thence he shall come to judge the living and the dead. (3) 
I believe in the Holy Spirit, the holy Catholic Church, the communion of 
Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and life everlast-
ing. Amen.
XIII. Prayer 7.24
“Whoever wishes to be saved and have the vision of God, should above all 
things hold to the Catholic faith. Whoever fails to keep it whole and unde-
23 The Apostles’ Creed—Roman Ritual.
24 This prayer is based on the well-known Athanasian Creed (Symbolum Athanasianum.)


--- PAGE 89 ---
sworn book of honorius
88
servaverit, absque dubio visionem divinam non habebit. () Fides autem 
catholica hec est, ut unum deum in trinitate et trinitatem in unitate vener-
emur neque confundentes personas, neque substanciam separantes. () 
Alia est enim persona Patris, alia Filii, ali a Spiritus sancti. Set Patris et Filii 
et Spiritus sancti una est divinitas, equalis gloria, coeterna maiestas. () 
Qualis Pater, talis Filius, talis Spiritus sanctus. Increatus Pater, increatus 
Filius, increatus Spiritus sanctus. Inmensus Pater, inmensus Filius, inmen-
sus Spiritus sanctus. () Eternus Pater, eternus Filius, eternus Spiritus sanc-
tus, et tamen non tres eterni set unus eternus, sicut non tres increati nec 
tres inmensi set unus increatus et unus inmensus. () Similiter omnipotens 
Pater, omnipotens Filius, omnipotens Spiritus sanctus, et tamen non tres 
omnipotentes set unus omnipotens. () Ha Deus Pater, Deus Filius, Deus 
Spiritus sanctus, et tamen non tres dii set unus est Deus. () Ha Dominus 
Pater, Dominus Filius, Dominus Spiritus sanctus, et tamen non tres domini 
set unus est Dominus, qui a sicut singillatim unamquamque personam 
Deum ac Dominum conﬁteri Christiana veritate compellimur, ita tres deos 
aut dominos dicere catholica religione prohibemur. () Pater a nullo est 
factus nec creatus nec genitus. Filius a Patre solo non factus nec creatus set 
genitus. Spiritus sanctus a Patre et Filio non factus nec creatus nec genitus 
set procedens. () Unus ergo Pater, non tres patres, unus Filius, non tres 
ﬁIii, unus Spiritus sanctus, non tres spiritus sancti. () Et in hac trinitate 
nichil prius aut posterius, nichil maius aut minus, set tote tres persone coe-
terne sibi sunt et coequales, ita ut per omnia, sicut iam supra dictum est, 
et unitas in trinitate et trinitas in unitate veneranda sit. () Qui vult ergo 
salvus esse et visionem divinam habere, ita de trinitate senciat.
() Set necessarium est ad eternam salutem et divinam visionem, ut 
incarnacionem quoque Domini nostri Iesu Christi ﬁdeliter credat. () Est 
ergo ﬁdes recta, ut credamus et conﬁteamur, quia Dominus noster Iesus 
Christus, Dei ﬁlius, deus et homo est. () Deus est ex substancia Patris 
ante secula genitus, et homo est ex substancia matris in seculo natus. 
() Perfectus deus, perfectus homo ex anima racionali et humana carne 
subsistens, equalis Patri secundum divinitatem, minor Patre secundum 
humanitatem. () Qui licet deus sit et homo, non duo tamen set unus est 


--- PAGE 90 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
89
filed, without doubt shall perish everlastingly. (2) And the Catholic faith is 
this: That we worship one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither con-
founding the persons, nor dividing the substance. (3) For there is one person 
of the Father, another of the Son, and another of the Holy Spirit. But the 
Godhead of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit is all one, the glory 
equal, the majesty co-eternal. (4) As is the Father, so is the Son, and so is the 
Holy Spirit. The Father uncreated, the Son uncreated, and the Holy Spirit 
uncreated. The Father incomprehensible, the Son incomprehensible, and the 
Holy Spirit incomprehensible. (5) The Father eternal, the Son eternal, and 
the Holy Spirit eternal. And yet they are not three eternals, but one eternal. 
As also there are not three uncreated, nor three incomprehensibles, but one 
uncreated and one incomprehensible. (6) So likewise the Father is almighty, 
the Son almighty, and the Holy Spirit almighty. And yet they are not three 
almighties, but one almighty. (7) So the Father is God, the Son is God, and 
the Holy Spirit is God, and yet they are not three Gods, but one God. (8) So 
likewise the Father is Lord, the Son is Lord, and the Holy Spirit is Lord, and 
yet they are not three Lords, but one Lord. For even though we are compelled 
by Christian truthfulness to acknowledge each person by himself to be God 
and Lord, we are forbidden by the Catholic religion to say that there are three 
Gods or Lords. (9) The Father is made of none, neither created, nor begot-
ten. The Son is of the Father alone, not made nor created, but begotten. The 
Holy Spirit is of the Father and of the Son, neither made, nor created, nor 
begotten, but proceeding. (10) So there is one Father, not three Fathers; one 
Son, not three Sons; one Holy Spirit, not three Holy Spirits. (11) And in this 
Trinity none is before or after another, none is greater or less than another. 
But the whole three Persons are co-eternal together, and co-equal. So that in 
all things, as is aforesaid, the Unity in Trinity and the Trinity in Unity is to 
be worshiped. (12) He therefore that will be saved, and have the divine vision, 
must thus think of the Trinity.
(13) Furthermore, it is necessary to everlasting salvation that he also 
believe rightly the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ. (14) For the right 
faith is, that we believe and confess that our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of 
God, is God and Man. (15) God, of the substance of the Father, begotten 
before the worlds; and Man, of the substance of his mother, born in the 
world. (16) Perfect God, and perfect Man, of a reasonable soul and human 
flesh subsisting. Equal to the Father as touching his Godhead, and i