SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii вҖ” the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 11/28  |  CHARS: 237659-262625 of 659348
============================================================

 punicionem 
manifestam videbit. (пңұпң·) In illis enim oracionibus Grecis, Hebraicis et Cal-
daicis sunt sacratissima nomina Dei et angelorum, que non nisi ex miseri-
cordia ab homine proferri permitterentur.
(пңұпңё) Et quando tibi accidit repulsa, non debes desperare set conп¬Ғteri et 
renes magis perscrutari et elemosinas multas lete largiri et missas diversas 
facere celebrari et oraciones diversas genibus п¬Ӯexis ad Dominum alloqui 
sive fari et tempestivis et protervis п¬Ӯetibus et oracionibus Dominum hor-
tari et amplecti. Hec solent facere sapientes, ut veniant ad eп¬Җectum. 


--- PAGE 126 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
125
(8) Then, having said this once in the morning, you must repeat the same 
around Terce, and again around noon, whereupon you can eat your first meal. 
(9) On the following day, namely, the Sabbath,64 you must do in the exact 
same manner. Do the same again on Sunday, except it is not necessary to fast, 
and in fact you can eat fish or meat as you prefer, but after noon, namely after 
you have finished praying for the third time.
(10) Then on the following night as you sleep, it will be revealed to you 
by an angel, whether your request will be permitted or rejected. If permit-
ted, you will do as will be taught in this book, (11) but if rejected, consider 
another time in which to seek permission, and then prepare yourself better 
before God, from whom permission will come. 
(12) But note, that the prayer, вҖңJesus, son of GodвҖҰвҖқ (XXVI) with this 
one: вҖңEleminator,вҖқ (XXVII) which is part of the same prayer, should be said 
three times softly, except there should be a short petition interval, after each 
time of praying.вҖ”(13) If however your petition is rejected, do as described for 
Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, with the exception that on Sunday, instead of 
fasting you must give three alms to three poor persons, with compassion and 
devotion.
(14) Then, in the first moon, namely the following Monday, do as you 
did earlier, and so too for the second, third, and fourth Monday, and thus all 
the way to the end. (15) And thus perhaps God will be merciful to you. But in 
the Latin65 prayers you should alter the petition, namely you should ask for 
mercy, not for granting your desire.
(16) And note that whoever wishes to say those prayers must be chaste 
and clean, and offer them with devotion, and anyone who does otherwise will 
undoubtedly see punishment. (17) In fact, those Greek, Hebrew, and Chal-
dean prayers include the most holy names of God and the angels, which must 
not be spoken by anyone except through his mercy.
(18) And when your request has been rejected, you must not despair, 
but confess and search your inner feelings more, and cheerfully give many 
alms, and have diverse Masses celebrated, and different prayers on bent knees 
addressed to the Lord, or speak suitable and passionate prayers with tears, 
exhorting and embracing the Lord. These are the things the wise men are 
accustomed to doing, in order to achieve success. 
64 Here obviously meaning Saturday.
65 As opposed to those consisting of mystical words and names.


--- PAGE 127 ---
sworn book of honorius
126
LI PпқІпқ©пқӯпқЎ пқӯпқөпқ®пқӨпқЎпқЈпқ©пқҜ 
Si Adonay largiente concessum habueris et opereris secundum modum 
subscriptum, luna 4a, 8a, 12a, 16a, 20a, 24a, 28a, 32a in die circa matutinum 
semel, circa terciam semel, circa nonam semel, circa vesperas semel dices 
has oraciones prescriptas, (2) scilicet вҖңAssaylemah t ...вҖқ et вҖңHazailemaht ...,вҖқ 
que est secunda pars eius, et [вҖңLemaht ...вҖқ et] вҖңLameht lemaht ...вҖқ et вҖңDeus 
summe, Deus ...вҖқ et вҖңTe queso, Domine ...,вҖқ <et> que est prologus eius, scili-
cet вҖңDeus summe, Deus ...,вҖқ nisi quod ille tres oraciones prime de intraneit-
ate artis: (3) вҖңAlpha et в„Ұ ...вҖқ et вҖңHeliscemaht ...вҖқ et вҖңTheos megale Patir ...вҖқ 
cum suo prologo вҖңLux mundi ...,вҖқ que post eam debet dici, prius dicantur, 
et post ille: вҖңHassailemaht ...вҖқ [et вҖңHazailemaht ...вҖқ] dicantur facto tamen 
intervallo postulativo. 
(4) Illa autem sanctissima oracio: вҖңLameht ragua ...вҖқ cum sua particula 
вҖңSemeht segaht [*segheahlt] ...вҖқ et cum suo prologo debet dici luna prima 
quater, scilicet summo mane semel, circa terciam semel, circa meridiem 
ter, circa nonam ter. 
(5) Luna 3a proferatur ter: Circa mane semel, circa meridiem semel, 
circa nonam semel. 
Luna 6a proferatur bis in mane, bis in meridie, bis in nona. 
Luna 9a proferatur ter in mane, ter in meridie, ter in nona. 
(6) In 12a luna proferatur ter in mane, ter in meridie, ter in nona, ter in 
vesperis.
Luna 15a proferatur [in] mane ter, in tercia ter, in meridie ter, in nona 
ter, in vesperis ter.
In 18a luna 21 et 23, 26 et 29 et 30 legantur similiter sicut in 15a.


--- PAGE 128 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
127
LI. The first purification.
If Adonay generously grants that you might have permission, then proceed 
according to the method described below. On the 4th, 8th, 12th, 16th, 20th, 
24th, 28th, and 32nd of the moon, the following prayers should be said once 
around Matins, once around Terce, once around None, and once around Ves-
per, (2) namely вҖңAssaylemahtвҖҰвҖқ (XX) and вҖңHazailemaht вҖҰ,вҖқ (XXI) which 
is the second part of it, and вҖң[Lemaht вҖҰвҖқ (XXII), and] вҖңLameht lemaht вҖҰвҖқ 
(XXIII), and вҖңGod the highest, God вҖҰвҖқ (XXIV), and вҖңI beseech you, O my 
Lord вҖҰвҖқ (XXV), <and> which is its prologue, namely, вҖңGod the highest, God 
вҖҰ,вҖқ except that those three first prayers from the essence of the art: (3) вҖңAlpha 
and Omega ...вҖқ (XV) and вҖңHeliscemaht ...вҖқ (XVI) and вҖңTheos megale Patir ...вҖқ 
(XVII) with its prologue вҖңthe light of the world ...вҖқ, (XVIII) which must be 
said after that which should be said first, and after that, say вҖңHassailemaht ...вҖқ 
(XX) [and вҖңHazailemaht....вҖқ] (XXI) yet they should be said with a petition 
interval.
(4) But that most holy prayer: вҖңLameht ragua...вҖқ with its part вҖңSemeht 
segaht [*segheahlt] ...вҖқ and with its prologue should be said on the Luna 
Prima66 four times, namely once very early in the morning, once around 
Terce, three times around noon, three times around None.
(5) On the third day of the moon it should be recited three times: Once 
in the morning, once around noon, and once around None.
On the sixth day of the moon it should be recited twice in the morning, 
twice at noon, and twice at None.
On the ninth day of the moon it should be recited three times in the 
morning, three times at noon, and three times at None.
(6) On the twelfth day of the moon it should be recited three times in the 
morning, three times at noon, and three times at Vespers.
On the fifteenth day of the moon it should be recited three times in the 
morning, three times at Terce, three times at noon, three times at None, and 
three times at Vespers.
On the eighteenth day of the moon, 21, 23, 26, 29, and 30 are to be read 
similarly as on the fifteenth.67
66 Luna Prima: The first day of the lunar calendar, i.e. the new moon.
67 HedegГҘrd (p. 33) interprets this to mean that prayers 21, 23, etc. as found later in the 
book, are to be recited on the 18th day of the moon. The other interpretation is that the 
same prayers are to be recited on the 18th, 21st, etc. day of the moon. This is how MS R 


--- PAGE 129 ---
sworn book of honorius
128
(пң·) Set nota, quod ista oracio in castitate et in mundicia et п¬Ғde prolata 
valet similiter ad pericula ignis, bestiarum vel demonum, et tunc nichil de 
horis vel lunacionibus respicere oportet. 
(пңё) Illa autem oracio sanctissima: вҖңHazaram hihel ...вҖқ cum suis particu-
lis пңҙ, que sunt вҖңHihelma helmaвҖқ et cetera, вҖңAgloros theomythosвҖқ et cetera, 
вҖңMegal agalвҖқ et cetera, вҖңHamicchiahelвҖқ et cetera, cum suis similiter prolo-
gis, (пң№) scilicet вҖңConп¬Ғrma, consolidaвҖқ et cetera, вҖңDeus omnium, qui esвҖқ et 
cetera, вҖңVeritas, luxвҖқ et cetera, вҖңEgo in conspectu tuoвҖқ et cetera, seriatim, ut 
prius iacent, debent prorumpi suaviter et intente post illam predictam: (пңұпң°) 
вҖңLameht ragua ...вҖқ eisdem diebus et horis nisi in uno casu, scilicet quando 
pro magno negocio petitur, puta loqui cum spiritibus vel videre Deum. 
Tunc ipsa non debet dici nisi semel, scilicet circa mane. (пңұпңұ) Set quando 
petitur sciencia vel tutela a malis vel cognicio celorum et angelorum et 
sigillorum et cetera, tunc sicut dictum est de вҖңLameht ragua ...вҖқ est facien-
dum. (пңұпңІ) Et hec oracio eandem eп¬ғcaciam cum вҖңLameht ragua ...вҖқ habet et 
aliquid plus in speciali vel, quod melius est, in casu, (пңұпңі) quo petitur п¬Ғeri 
a spiritibus celestibus aliquid arduum et magnum eis approbatum, scilicet 
descendere et homini loqui vel cogere spiritus aereos et terreos ad venien-
dum et obediendum. 
(пңұпңҙ) Illa autem oracio: вҖңSemoht gechel...вҖқ et illa: вҖңOmnipotens, sem-
piteme Deus ...вҖқ et illa: вҖңSemoht lamen ...вҖқ proferantur cum illa: вҖңIesu, Dei 
п¬Ғlius ...вҖқ in illis diebus, (пңұпңө) in quibus alie predicte proferri non debent, sicut 
dictum est supra, quod non debent proferri luna пңІa nec пңөa nec пң·a nec пңұпңҙa, 
et sic de aliis, ut prius patet.
(пңұпң¶) Et nota, quod si coram iudice habet magnam causam, que non 
possit ad п¬Ғnem produci, et ieiunet precedenti die qua ibit ad curiam pro-
positum causam suam pane et aqua, postea proferat basse bis illas tres 
oraciones: вҖңSemoht...вҖқ et вҖңOmnipotens ...вҖқ et вҖңSemoht ...;вҖқ (пңұпң·) tanta enim 


--- PAGE 130 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
129
(7) But note, that this same prayer offered in chastity and cleanness and 
faith has power over dangers from fire, wild beasts, or daemons, and then no 
specific time of day or month need be observed.
(8) But that most holy prayer: вҖңHazaram hihel ...вҖқ (XXXI) with its four 
parts, which are вҖңHihelma helmaвҖқ etc. (XXXII), вҖңAgloros theomythosвҖқ etc. 
(XXXIV), вҖңMegal agalвҖқ etc. (XXXV) вҖңHamicchiahelвҖқ etc. (XXXVII), simi-
larly with its prologues, (9) namely, вҖңStrengthen, solidifyвҖқ etc. (XXXIII), вҖҳO 
God of all, you who areвҖҷ etc. (XXXIVb), вҖңthe Truth, the LightвҖқ etc. (XXXVI), 
вҖңI speak these things in your presenceвҖқ etc. (XXXVIII), as set down in order 
earlier. They must be projected pleasantly and attentively after that one pre-
ceding: (10) вҖңLameht ragua ...вҖқ (XXVIII) the same days and with the hours, 
except in the one case, namely when your petition is for some great undertak-
ing, for example to speak with the spirits or to see God. Then it must be said 
only once, namely around morning. (11) But when your petition is for knowl-
edge, or protection from evil, or learning about the heavens and the angels, 
and the seals, etc., then you must do as said concerning вҖңLameht ragua вҖҰвҖқ 
(XXVIII). (12) And this prayer has the same effectiveness as вҖңLameht ragua,вҖқ 
and is even somewhat more specific, which is better in the case (13) that you 
desire the celestial spirits to approve some great or difficult task, such as them 
descending and speaking to people,  or to compel the spirits of the air and the 
earth into coming and obeying.
(14) Therefore this prayer must be offered: вҖңSemoht gechel ...вҖқ (XXXIX), 
and this: вҖңOmnipotent, eternal God ...вҖқ (XL), and this: вҖңSemoht lamen ...вҖқ 
(XLI), with this one: вҖңJesus, the Son of God ...вҖқ (XXVI) on those days, (15) in 
which the others preceding must not be offered, as explained above, because 
they must not be offered on the second day of the moon, nor the fifth, sev-
enth, nor the fourteenth, and so for the others as appears earlier.
(16) And note, that if someone has a major case before a judge, the end 
of which cannot be determined, he should fast on bread and water the day 
before he is to plead his case, and afterwards he should recite quietly those 
three prayers, two times: вҖңSemoht вҖҰвҖқ (XXXIX) and вҖңAlmighty вҖҰвҖқ (XL) and 
interpreted it. I am inclined to go with the latter interpretation, for three reasons. First, 
the first interpretation would mean that a good portion of the month would have no 
recitations. Second, the fact that it only goes up to 30 is another clue that days of the 
moon are intended. Finally, the fact that those prayers hadnвҖҷt yet been given is another 
clue.


--- PAGE 131 ---
sworn book of honorius
130
sapiencia et eloquencia dabitur sibi in proponendo causam suam, quod 
breviter optinebit, nisi quod oportet <te> esse bene mundum et castum. 
(пңұпңё) Similiter hanc oracionem valet dicere, quando aliquis spiritus vocatus 
venit, cum illa: вҖңLameht ragua ...вҖқ pro evitando periculum et acquirendo 
sapienciam et eloquenciam aп¬Җandi audacter spiritu advocato.
LII
Cum igitur nichil aliud fecerit vel aliquod peccatum cogitaverit, roget con-
tinue Deum aliis horis a primis пң¶a, пңұпң°a, пңұпңІa oracione et in mane vadat ad mis-
sam et eundo dicat пңұпң¶, (пңІ) in templo dicat пңІпңІ, item пңұпңҙ, пңІпңҙ,5 пңІпңұ, пңіпңІ, пңіпңі, пңіпңҙ, пңІпң№, 
пңіпң° et ita faciat continue per пңІпң° dies cavens sibi diligenter, ne incidat in pec-
catum. (пңі) Si tamen casualiter in peccatum inciderit, immediate peniteat et 
conп¬Ғteatur; ieiunet, si possit, continue. (пңҙ) Si non, de duobus unum relaxet. 
Set per пң· dies ordine retrogrado procedendo ab omni morticinio ieiunet.
(пңө) Tunc habeat sacerdotem cautum et п¬Ғdelem, qui sibi matutinam, 
primam et terciam et missam de Spiritu sancto cantet dicens in introitu 
пңұпңі, post oп¬Җertorium пң№. (пң¶) Tunc accipiat thus et suп¬Җumiget, ut perti-
net ad altare, dicens primam. Et quia beati patres in illis gloriosis sanc-
tis ibidem nominatis sperabant, ideo sic fecerunt. (пң·) Operans autem, si 
in aliquibus aliis sanctis maiorem devocionem habeat, mutet nomen pro 
nomine, quia п¬Ғdes operatur ut predixi. (пңё) пңІa oracio immediate dicatur et 
post вҖңTe igitur ...вҖқ пңі, пңҙ, пңө, пң·, пңё, et sic in sacrando corpus Christi petat pro 
5 SSM reads вҖң23.вҖқ


--- PAGE 132 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
131
вҖңSemoht вҖҰвҖқ (XLI). (17) For such great wisdom and eloquence will be given to 
him for pleading his cause, that it will be obtained quickly, except you must be 
very clean and abstinent. (18) Similarly it is powerful to say this prayer when 
an invoked spirit has come, with this one: вҖңLameht ragua ...вҖқ (XXVIII) in 
order to avoid danger and acquire wisdom and eloquence in speaking boldly 
with the spirit that is called.
LII.
Now, provided that he has not done anything else, nor intended to sin, he 
should continuously ask God, in all other hours except Prime, with the sixth, 
tenth, and twelfth prayers,68 and in the morning he should go to mass and 
while going he should say sixteen; (2) in the church he should say 22, likewise, 
14, 24,69 21, 32, 33, 34, 29, 30, and he should do thus continuously for twenty 
days, taking careful precautions against falling into sin. (3) If however he acci-
dentally sins, he must immediately repent and confess; if he can let him fast 
continuously, (4) but if he is unable to, he may relax that to fasting every other 
day. But for seven days consecutive going back prior, he must fast and abstain 
from (eating) all dead matter.70
(5) Then he should have a cautious and faithful priest, who should sing 
for him Matins, Prime, Terce, and a Mass of the Holy Spirit. During the 
introit he should say 13,71 and after the offertory he should say 9.72 (6) Then he 
should take incense and fumigate as he approaches the altar, saying the first.73 
And note that those famous saints were named therein because the blessed 
fathers had faith in them, (7) But if the operator has greater devotion to any 
other saints, he may replace the names therein with those of the other saints, 
because faith works, as I have said before.74 (8) The second prayer should be 
said immediately and after вҖңte igiturвҖқ 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, and thus in consecrating the 
68 LVIII, LXV, and LXVII.
69 SSM reads вҖң23.вҖқ
70 Compare SSM L.4.f.15: nil mortuum comedas, nec tangas (вҖңyou should consume 
nothing dead, nor touch anyвҖқ). The Royal ms misinterprets this as abstaining from all 
deadly sin.
71 LXVIII.
72 LXIV.
73 LIII.
74 This passage, starting with вҖңand noteвҖқ seems to be an example of an interpolation by 
the вҖңLondonвҖқ redactor, since it isnвҖҷt found in SSM. See Veenstra 2012 p. 156вҖ“7.


--- PAGE 133 ---
sworn book of honorius
132
operante sacerdos, ut eп¬Җectum peticionum suarum per divinam graciam 
assequatur. (пң№) Et ita intellige de omnibus oracionibus, que pertinent ad 
sacerdotem et ad operacionem, quia sunt generales ad omnes peticiones 
habendas. (пңұпң°) Set nichil aliis addas. Item post communionem dicat sacer-
dos пңІпң¶, post missam vero recipiat operans eucaristiam dicendo пңұпң№, пңІпң°. (пңұпңұ) 
Et caveat, ne corpus Christi accipiat pro eп¬Җectu malo, quia non esset salus 
immo mors, unde quidam intitulaverunt librum istum sic: вҖңIncipit mors 
anime.вҖқ (пңұпңІ) Et hoc est verum male operantibus et propter eп¬Җectum malum, 
et non propter scienciam. Nam ait Dominus: вҖңPetite, et dabitur vobis. Que-
rite et invenietis.вҖқ (пңұпңі) Et alibi dicit Dominus: вҖңUbi duo vel tres congregati 
fuerint in nomine meo, ibi sum in medioвҖқ et вҖңDe omni re, quam pecierint 
in nomine meo, п¬Ғet illis a patre meo.вҖқ 
LIII
Oraciones prenominate et post nominande numero sunt hec, scilicet: 
PпқІпқ©пқӯпқЎ пқҜпқІпқЎпқЈпқ©пқҜ 
Agla, lux, veritas, vita, via, iudex misericors, misericordia, fortitudo, 
paciencia, conserva et iuva me in hac sancta visione et miserere mei (пңІ) 
propter misericordiam tuam et servicium huius sancti suп¬Җumigii et sancti 
sacriп¬Ғcii Domini nostri Iesu Christi et propter meritum gloriose semper 
virginis Marie, matris Domini nostri Iesu Christi, (пңі) et meritum apostolo-


--- PAGE 134 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
133
body of Christ, the priest should petition on behalf of the operator, that he 
may obtain success in his petition through divine grace. (9) And so too you 
should understand regarding all the prayers, which pertains to the priest and 
for the operation, because in general they are required for all petitions. (10) 
But nothing else should be added. Likewise after the mass the priest should 
say 26, and after Mass in truth he should receive the Eucharist, saying 19 and 
20. (11) And he must beware, not to receive the body of Christ for any evil 
purpose, because then it would be ineffective, and might even be deadly, from 
which some have entitled that book вҖңThe death of the soul.вҖқ75 (12) And this is 
truly bad for those who would operate for an evil purpose, and not on behalf 
of knowledge. For the Lord has said: вҖңAsk and you will receive. Seek and you 
will find.вҖқ76 (13) And elsewhere the Lord says: вҖңWhere two or three are gath-
ered together in my name, there I am in the midst of themвҖқ77 and вҖңanything 
which they ask for in my name, it will be done for them by my father.вҖқ78
LIII.
The prayers previously named, and named afterwards, with their number, are 
these:79
First Prayer.80
Agla, the light, the truth, the life, the way, merciful, mercy, the strength, 
patience, preserve and help me in this sacred vision, and pity me (2) because 
of your compassion, and the service of this holy suffumigation, and the holy 
sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, and because of the merit of the glorious 
and eternal virgin Mary, mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, (3) and the merits 
75 Compare Bern, Statbibliothek, Handshriften 260, f 227 vb, listed by Klaassen and by 
Thorndike under necromancy in list of incip. Cp Boudet Entre p. 94.
76 Matt. 7:7.
77 Matt. 18:20.
78 Matt. 18:19. This concludes the вҖңFirst Purification;вҖқ the instructions for the second are 
found in chapter XCVIII. The intervening chapters, the prayers mentioned in the text, 
seem to be inserted here for convenience. They donвҖҷt break the narrative in SSM, which is 
evidence the London Honorius prototype was adapted from an earlier text.
79 These following prayers each begin with one of the 100 names of God, in the same 
order as enumerated in chapters C and CI. See chapter XCVII. Compare Gollancz 1914 
pp. V ff.
80 Ars. Not. 53, JV p. 51.


--- PAGE 135 ---
sworn book of honorius
134
rum Petri et Pauli, Andree, Iacobi, Iohanis, Thome, Iacobi, Philippi, Bar-
tholomei, Mathei, Symonis et Thadei, Lini, Cleti, Clementis, Sixti, Cornelii, 
Cipriani, (4) Laurencii, Grisogoni, Iohanis et Pauli, Cosme et Damiani et 
omnium sanctorum tuorum, quorum meritis et precibus concedas hanc 
sanctam tuam visionem per eundem Dominum nostrum.
LIV пңІпқЎ пқҜпқІпқЎпқЈпқ©пқҜ 
Monhon, Domine, sancte Pater, omnipotens, sempiterne Deus, in cuius 
conspectu omnia sunt visibilium et invisibilium fundamenta creaturarum 
omnium, cuius oculi imperfectum meum viderunt, cuius caritatis dul-
cedine pleni sunt celi et terra, (2) cuius aures omnia audiunt, qui omnia 
vidisti, antequam fierent, in cuius libro omnes formati sunt dies et homines 
inscripti, respice hodie super famulum tuum tibi tota mente et toto corde 
subiectum. (3) Per Spiritum sanctum tuum confirma me, ut te videam. 
Benedic hodie et protege omnes actus meos hodiernos et hanc inspeccio-
nem et constancia tue visitacionis me illustra. Amen. 
LV пңіпқЎ пқҜпқІпқЎпқЈпқ©пқҜ 
Tetragramathon, respice, Domine, Deus, clemens Pater, omnium eterne 
dispositor <omnium> virtutum. Operaciones meas hodie considera, tu, 
qui es actuum hominum et angelorum inspector atque discretor. (2) Ideo te 
rogo, ut admirabilis gracia promissionis tue in me dignetur subitam adim-
plere virtutem huius sancte visionis, et in me tantam efficaciam nomini 
sancto tuo et magno infundas, tu, qui laudem tuam in ore te diligencium 
imponis et infundis. Amen.
LVI пңҙпқЎ пқҜпқІпқЎпқЈпқ©пқҜ 
Hely Deus, creator, Adonay, omnium [visibilium et] invisibilium creatura-
rum Pater piissime, qui incircumscripto lumine habitas eternaliter <et> 
ante principium mundi omnia ineffabiliter disponens atque gubernans, (2) 
eternitatem tuam atque incomprehensibilem pietatem verbis supplican-


--- PAGE 136 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
135
of the apostles Peter and Paul, Andrew, Jacob, John, Thomas, Jacob, Philip, 
Bartholomew, Matthew, Simon, Thaddeus, Linus, Cletus, Clement, Sixtus, 
of Cornelius, Cyprian, (4) Laurence, Grisogone, John and Paul, Cosme and 
Damian, and all your saints, through whose merits and prayers may you grant 
this holy vision of yourself, through the same our Lord.
LIV. Prayer 2.81
Monhon, O Lord, O holy Father, all-powerful, eternal God, in whose sight 
are the foundations of all creatures visible and invisible, whose eyes have seen 
my imperfections, whose sweet charity fills the heavens and the earth, (2) 
whose ears hear all things, who sees all things before they are made, in whose 
book all days are formed, and all men inscribed, look upon your servant this 
day, whose whole mind and heart are exposed to you. (3) Through your Holy 
Spirit strengthen me, in order that I may see you. Bless me today and in this 
inspection protect all my actions, and illuminate me with the constancy of 
your visitation. Amen.
LV. Prayer 3.82
Tetragrammaton, Look upon me, O Lord, God, merciful Father, eternal 
disposer of all virtues. Examine my works today, you who are the inspector 
and judge of all acts of men and of angels. (2) Therefore I ask you that the 
wonderful grace of your promise may be deemed worthy to fulfill the sudden 
power of this holy vision, and pour into me such great effectiveness to your 
holy and great name you, who infuse and pour your praise into the mouth of 
those who love you. Amen.
LVI. Prayer 4.83
Hely Deus, the creator, Adonay, of all [visible and] invisible creations, O 
most holy Father, who dwells forever in infinite light <and> before the begin-
ning of the world, ineffably disposing and governing all things, (2) I approach 
your infiniteness and incomprehensible piety with words of supplication, so 
81 Ars. Not. 128, JV p. 87.
82 Ars. Not. 129, JV p. 87.
83 Ars. Not. 130, JV p. 87.


--- PAGE 137 ---
sworn book of honorius
136
tibus aggredior, ut huius sacramentalis atque mistici operis in me et per 
tui et sanctorum angelorum potenciam eп¬ғcacia, tui visio et consideracio, 
clarescat (пңі) atque per eorundem sanctorum angelorum nomina in memo-
ria et mente habundet, atque sancta opera tua facialis tue sancte visionis in 
me cum stabilitate clarescant. Amen. 
LVII пңөпқЎ пқҜпқІпқЎпқЈпқ©пқҜ 
Hocleiste, sancte Deus, Pater pie et indissolubilis argumentacio cordis, qui 
celum et terram, mare et abissos et omnia, que in eis sunt, stabiliri voluisti, 
(пңІ) in cuius conspectu omnis racio, sermo, opus et sanctitas subsistit, per 
hec preciosa sacramenta angelorum tuorum da michi ea, que desidero et 
credo, visionis huius absque malignitatis intencione gloriam et graciam. 
Amen.
LVIII пң¶пқЎ пқҜпқІпқЎпқЈпқ©пқҜ 
Hamphynethon, Heloy, clementissime creator et inspirator et reformator 
omnium animarum viciatarum et omnium bonarum voluntatum approba-
tor et ordinator, (пңІ) deprecacionem gloriosus intende et mentem meam 
respice benignus, ut quod ex humilitate deprecor, sicut a te promissum est, 
michi de tue magniп¬Ғcencie largitate concedas. Amen. 
LIX пң·пқЎ пқҜпқІпқЎпқЈпқ©пқҜ 
Lamyhara, omnipotens, misericors Pater, omnium creaturarum ordinator, 
[iuste] iudex, eterne rex regum et Domine dominancium, qui tuis sanc-
tis sapienciam, sanctitatem et gloriam conferre dignatus es, (пңІ) concede 
michi, ut possim te videre mirabiliter, qui omnia diiudicas et discernis. (пңі) 
Illumina hodie cor meum fulgore claritatis et mundicie atque sanctiп¬Ғcen-
cie, ut cognoscam et intelligam et facialiter videam te et tuam gloriam. Et 
quod huius gloriam videre merear, exopto. Amen. 


