SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii — the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 21/28  |  CHARS: 477515-501183 of 659348
============================================================

, Amocap, 
Oylol, Mylau, Abuchaba, Zobha, (9) Drohas, Palas, Sambas, Mexty-
ura, Alcibany, Alflas, Baxatau, Gahatus, [Caudes, Yarabal, Harit], Iesse, 
Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob, angeli Domini vos excitent, qui vos venire 
constringant.”
49 Vihel: D: Viel. SSM: Vyel
50 Pars: D and SSM omit.
51 Christus Lanciel / Lanciel Christus: D: Christus Lancihel / Lancihel Christus. SSM: 
Christus, lancyel, Christus / Lancyel, Christus / lancyel (!)
52 Promti: *Prompti. Compare CXXIX 9 and 14 and SSM L.3.f.30.


--- PAGE 246 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
245
Frigicap, cold and damp, masculine, where the angels of Mercury 
dominate. / Sother Vihel / Vihel Sother
Northern part, where the angels of Saturn dominate, earth cold and 
dry / Christ Lanciel / Lanciel Christ
CXXVIII. Second day.
On the next day you should hear matins, prime, terce, mass, none, vespers, 
and compline, then go to the circle saying prayer 17. (2) Then you should have 
incense and a censer, in which should be glowing charcoals, and you should 
put the incense over the glowing charcoals, and fumigate the circle saying 1 
(LIII) and 2 (LIV), beginning at the East to the West, from the South to the 
North, then from Consol to Nogahem, and then from Nogahem to Frigicap, 
and afterwards the sky and the earth, and this you should do three times. (3) 
But first the seven preceding names must be erased.255 With this done, suf-
fumigate the circle, and in this way you should raise up the winds nine times. 
(4) Here begins the raising up of the winds. The first 
circle beginning in the east and ending in the south: 
(5) “Baxhatau, Gahatus, Caudes, Yarabal, Harit, Iesse, Rion, Nesaph, 
Naadob, Attraurbiabilis, Yaconaababur, Carmeal, Ynial, Prohathophas, Cam-
bores, Trachatat, Nassar, (6) Naassa, Hebethel, Amocap, Oylol, Mylau, Abu-
caba, Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Sambas, Mextyura, Alcybany, Alflas,256 I invoke 
you, that you allow me those things which are described in my petitions and 
orders. The power of the most high God constrains you to obey!”
(7) The second circle beginning in the south, and end in the west. 
(8) “Attraurbiabilis, Y[a]conaababur, Carmeal, Innyal, Prohathophas, 
Cambores, Trachatat, Nassar, Naassa, Hebethel, Amocap, Oylol, Mylau, 
Abuchaba, Zobha, (9) Drohas, Palas, Sambas, Mextyura, Alcibany, Alflas, 
255 See CXXVII.15.
256 SSM L.3.f.30: Baxahathau, gaatus, candones, yarabal, haryx, yesse, ryon, nesaph, 
naadobp: atrahurbyabylys, yaconaablabur, carmeal, iunyal, proathofas: cambores, 
trachatat, nassar, (6) naassah: hebethel, amocab, oylol, mylalu, abucaba: zobha, drohas, 
palas, Sambas: Mextyura, Altybany, alphlas.


--- PAGE 247 ---
sworn book of honorius
246
() Tercius circulus incipiens in occidente et terminans in septemtri-
one 
Tunc in occidente dicat: () “Hebethel, Amocap, Oylol, Milau, Abu-
caba, Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Zambas, Mextyura, Alcybany, Alﬂas, Bax-
hatau, Gaatus, Caudes, Yarabal, Harit, Iesse, Rion, Nesaph, () Naadob, 
Attraurbiabilis, Yaconaababur, Carmeal, Ynnyal, Proathophas, Cambores, 
Trachathat, Nassar, Naassa, sciencia Dei et sapiencia Salomonis vos con-
vincat, que vos et ventos vestros excitare faciat.” 
() Quartus circulus incipiens in septemtrione et terminans in consol 
Tunc in septemtrione dicat: () “Mextyura, Alchibany, Alﬂas, Bax-
hatau, Gahatus, Caudes, Iaraba<a>l, Harith, Iesse, Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob, 
Attraurbiabilis, Iaconaababur, Carmeal, Innyal, Prohathophas, Cambores, 
() Trachathat, Nassar, Naassa, Hebethel, Amocap, Oylol, Myla<l>u, Abu-
caba, Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Sambas, sancta nomina Dei vos subiugent, que 
vos et ventos vestros excitare et huc venire constringant.” 
() Quintus circulus incipiens in consol et terminans in nogahem 
Tunc in consol dicat: () “Harit, Iesse, Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob, Attrau-
rbiabilis, Yaconaababur, Carme[a]l, Innyal, Prohathophas, Cambores, Tra-
chatath, Nassar, Naassa, Hebethel, Amocap, Oylol, () Mylau, Abucaba, 
Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Zambas, [Mextyura, Alcybany, Alﬂas], Baxhatau, 
Gaatus, Caudes, Yarabal, capud et corona principis vestri Belzebut vos 
venire et ventos vestros excitare constringat.”
() us circulus incipiens in nogahem et terminans in frigicap 
Tunc in nogahem dicat: () “Cambores, Tracatath, Nassar, Naassa, 
Hebethel, Amocap, Oylol, Mylau, Abucaba, Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Sam-
bas, Mextyura, Alcybany, Alﬂas, Baxhatau, Gaatus, Caudes, Yarabal, () 
Harith, Iesse, Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob, Attraurbiabilis, Iaconaababur, Car-
meal, Ynnyal, Prohathophas, iudicium summi Dei tremendum vos con-
vincat, qui vos et ventos vestros ad mandatum meum venire et obedire 
constringat.” 
() us circulus incipiens in frigicap et terminans in oriente 


--- PAGE 248 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
247
Baxatau, Gahatus, [Caudes, Yarabal, Harit], Iesse, Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob,257 
may those angels of the Lord raise you up, who compel you to come.”
(10) Third, begin the circle in the west, and end in the north.
Then, facing west, say: (11) “Hebethel, Amocap, Oylol, Milau, Abucaba, 
Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Zambas, Mextyura, Alcybany, Alflas, Baxhatau, Gaa-
tus, Caudes, Yarabal, Harit, Iesse, Rion, Nesaph, (12) Naadob, Attraurbiabilis, 
Yaconaababur, Carmeal, Ynnyal, Proathophas, Cambores, Trachathat, Nas-
sar, Naassa, the knowledge of God and the wisdom of Solomon conquers you, 
so that you and your winds are made to rise up.”
(13) Fourth, begin the circle in the north, and ending in Consol.
Then, facing north, say: (14) “Mextyura, Alchibany, Alflas, Baxhatau, 
Gahatus, Caudes, Iarabal, Harith, Iesse, Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob, Attraurbiabi-
lis, Iaconaababur, Carmeal, Innyal, Prohathophas, Cambores, (15) Trachathat, 
Nassar, Naassa, Hebethel, Amocap, Oylol, Myla<l>u, Abucaba, Zobha, Dro-
has, Palas, Sambas, the sacred names of God will subjugate you, who compel 
you and your winds to arise and come here.”
(16) Fifth, begin the circle in consol, and end in Nogahem.
Then, in consol, say: (17) “Harit, Iesse, Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob, Attrau-
rbiabilis, Yaconaababur, Carme[a]l, Innyal, Prohathophas, Cambores, Tra-
chatath, Nassar, Naassa, Hebethel, Amocap, Oylol, (18) Mylau, Abucaba, 
Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Zambas, Mextyura, Alcybany, Alflas, Baxhatau, Gaa-
tus, Caudes, Yarabal, the head and crown of your prince Belzebut compels 
you to arise and come.”
(19) Sixth, begin the circle in Nogahem and end in Frigicap.
Then, towards Nogahem say: (20) “Cambores, Tracatath, Nassar, Naassa, 
Hebethel, Amocap, Oylol, Mylau, Abucaba, Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Sambas, 
Mextyura, Alcybany, Alflas, Baxhatau, Gaatus, Caudes, Yarabal, (21) Harith, 
Iesse, Ryon, Nesaph, Naadob, Attraurbiabilis, Iaconaababur, Carmeal, 
Ynnyal, Prohathophas, the terrible judgment of the most high God conquers 
you, which compels you and your winds to come at my command, and obey.”
(22) Seventh, begin the circle in frigicap, and end in the East:
257 SSM:  Hatraurbyabylys, yaconablabur, carmeal, iunyal, prohatofas, cambores, 
trachatat, nassar, naassah, hebethel, amocab, oylol, mylalu, aabucaba: zobah, (9) drohas, 
palas, Sambas, mextyura, alcibany, alphlas, baxathau, cahatus, caudones, yarabal, haryth, 
yesse, ryon, nesaph, naadob.


--- PAGE 249 ---
sworn book of honorius
248
Tunc in frigicap dicat: () “Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Sambas, Mextyura, 
Alcybany, Alﬂas, Baxhatau, Gaatus, Caudes, Yarabal, Harith, Iesse, Ryon, 
() Nesaph, Naadob, Attraurbiabilis, Yaconaababur, Carmeal, Innyal, 
Prohathophas, Cambores, Trachatath, [Nassar, Naassa], Hebethel, Amo-
cap, Oilol, Mylau, Ab<r>ucaba, meo placati suﬀumigio, () timor furo-
ris Domini et ignis ignem devorans vos paciﬁcet et paciﬁcatos mittat cum 
ventis vobis subditis et demonibus eorundem et missos obedire constrin-
gat, quoniam ei debetur ab omni creatura reverencia et obediencia cum 
timore.” 
() Tunc ﬂexis genibus versus orientem dic: “Unde tu, Domine, , 
celi et terre conditor” et cetera. Et addes in ﬁne: “Te suppliciter exoro et 
invoco, ut ex dono gracie tue et virtute sanctorum tuorum nominum, () 
ut isti prenominati venti hos demones, quos invocavero, congregent, con-
stringant et ligent eos meis peticionibus penitus obedire, () quia tu es 
Deus potens, pius et misericors, qui vivis et regnas et imperas et regna-
turus es per omnia secula seculorum. Amen.” 
() Hoc facto videbis tranquillitatem ab omni parte mundi in nubi-
bus elevari, nec cessabit, donec perfeceris tuum opus, et erunt nubes iuxta 
circulum circumcirca. () Set prius iuxta circulum hec  predicta nomina 
scribantur, quia posset circulus aliter violari.
CXXIX 3a dies
Tercia vero die<s> visitabis ecclesiam, ut oportet, et tunc habeas ignem, 
candelam de cera virginea et illa, que tue conveniunt questioni, thuribu-
lum, thus,  gladios equales, () si possis claros, et si velis habere socios, 
poteris habere . Habeas eciam vinum optimum, de quo bibes, et socii tui, 
dum cognoveritis motus suos. () Et si solus fueris, porta  in latere dex-
tro et  in sinistro, si tres, porta , et quilibet illorum , si , ferat quilibet 
unum, et tu , si , porta unum, et quilibet illorum , si , porta , et quili-
bet illorum unum.


--- PAGE 250 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
249
Then, in Frigicap, say: (23) “Zobha, Drohas, Palas, Sambas, Mextyura, 
Alcybany, Alflas, Baxhatau, Gaatus, Caudes, Yarabal, Harith, Iesse, Ryon, 
(24) Nesaph, Naadob, Attraurbiabilis, Yaconaababur, Carmeal, Innyal, Pro-
hathophas, Cambores, Trachatath, [Nassar, Naassa], Hebethel, Amocap, 
Oilol, Mylau, Ab<r>ucaba, with my pleasing suffumigation, (25) the mad-
dening fear of the Lord, and the fire of fires, pacifies you, and pacified may 
he send with your winds the subordinates and daemons of the same, and may 
he bind the messengers to obey, because all creatures owe him reverence and 
obedience with fear.”
(26) Then, bending your knees to the east, say: “From whence you, O 
Lord, 49, the originator of heaven and earth” etc. And add at the end: “I hum-
bly beg and pray to you, that by the gift of your grace and the power of your 
holy names, (27) that these daemons of the previously-named wind, which I 
have called upon, may assemble; may they be constrained and bound to obey 
my petitions completely, (28) because you are a mighty God, kind and merci-
ful, who lives and reigns and commands through all eternity. Amen.”
(29) With this done, you will see a stillness from all parts of the world, 
rising up to the clouds, nor will it cease until you have completed your work, 
and the clouds will be all around near the circle. (30) But these seven preced-
ing names should be written next to the circle beforehand, because otherwise 
they might be able to violate the circle.
CXXIX. The Third Day.
On the third day you should visit the church, as usual, and then you should 
have a fire, a candle of virgin wax, and those things which are relevant to the 
inquiry,258 the censer, the incense, seven equal swords, (2) if possible they 
should be lustrous, and if you wish to have associates, you can have seven. You 
may also have a choice wine,  which you and your associates can drink while 
you look for their movements. (3) And if you are alone, carry four swords on 
your right side, and three on your left. If there are three of you, carry three 
swords yourself and the others should each carry two; if there are five, carry 
three yourself, and the others should each carry one; if there are four, carry 
one yourself, and the others should each carry two.
258 GH p. 38: “whatever else suits his purpose.”


--- PAGE 251 ---
sworn book of honorius
250
(4) Tunc XIa hora die[i], cum fueritis competenter saciati vino et pis-
cibus vel aliquo alio a carne, magister semel excitet ventos incipiendo ab 
illis, qui habent dominium die illa, et habeat signum Domini in manu sua 
dextra. Post hoc demones excitabit dicens contra orientem: 
(5) Excitacio spirituum Solis, que fit in die Dominico, 
quando fit particulariter. 
“Ubi est Barthan rex, ubi sunt Thaadas, [Caudas], Yalcal eius ministri? (6) 
Ubi est Formione rex, ubi sunt Guth, Maguth, Guthrin eius ministri? Ubi 
est Iammax rex, ubi sunt Carmox, Ycanol, Pasfran eius ministri? (7) Ubi 
est Sarabocres rex, ubi sunt Nassar, Cynassa eius ministri? Ubi est Har-
than rex, ubi sunt Bileth, Mylalu, Abucaba eius ministri? (8) Ubi est Abaa 
rex, ubi sunt Hyici, Quyron, Zach, Eladeb eius ministri? Ubi est Maymon 
rex, ubi sunt Assaiby, Albunalich, [Haibalidech, Yasfla] eius ministri? (9) 
Omnes occurrite cicius quam poteritis promti meis peticionibus et pre-
ceptis obedire. Summa ac divina maiestas vos convincat, que vos venire 
constringat.” 
(10) Excitacio diei Iovis et spirituum eius,  
quando particulariter fit. 
[Tunc in consol dicat:] “Ubi est Formione rex, ubi sunt Guth, Maguth, 
Guthrin eius ministri? (11) Ubi est Iammax rex, ubi sunt Carmox, Ycanol, 
Pasfran eius ministri? Ubi est Sarabocres rex, ubi sunt Nassar, Cinassa eius 
ministri? (12) Ubi est Harthan rex, ubi sunt Bileth, Mylalu, Abucaba eius 
ministri? Ubi est Abaa rex, ubi sunt Hyici, Quiron, Zach, Eladeb eius min-
istri? (13) Ubi est Maymon rex, ubi sunt Hassaybi, Albunalich, Haibalidech, 
Yasfla [eius ministri]? Ubi est Barthan rex, ubi sunt Thaadas, Caudas, Yalcal 


--- PAGE 252 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
251
(4) Then in the eleventh hour of the day, when you have been suitably 
satisfied with wine and fish, or any other meat, the master should raise up the 
winds once, beginning with those which have dominion on that day, and he 
should have the Sign of the Lord in his right hand. After this he should raise 
up the daemons saying towards the east: 
(5) The raising up of the spirits of the Sun, which should 
particularly be done on a Sunday.
“Where is King Barthan?259 where are Thaadas, [Caudas],260 and Yalcal his 
ministers? (6) Where is King Formione? where are Guth, Maguth, and Guth-
rin his ministers? Where is King Iammax?, where are Carmox, Ycanol, and 
Pasfran his ministers? (7) Where is King Sarabocres? where are Nassar and 
Cynassa his ministers? Where is King Harthan? where are Bileth, Mylalu, 
and Abucaba his ministers?  (8) Where is King Abaa? where are his minis-
ters Hyici, Quyron, Zach, and Eladeb? Where is King Maymon? where are 
his ministers Assaiby, Albunalich, [Haibalidech, and Yasfla]? (9) Come with 
all haste to meet us, that you are willing and able to obey my petitions and 
precepts. The Most High and Divine Majesty conquers you, so that you are 
constrained to come.”
(10) The raising up of the day of Jupiter, and those 
spirits which are particular to it.
[Then in Consol say:] “Where is King Formione? Where are his ministers 
Guth, Maguth, and Guthrin? (11) Where is King Iammax? Where are his 
ministers Carmox, Ycanol, and Pasfran? Where is King Sarabocres? Where 
are his ministers Nassar and Cinassa? (12) Where is King Harthan? Where 
are his ministers Bileth, Mylalu, and Abucaba? Where is King Abaa? Where 
are his ministers Hyici, Quiron, Zach, and Eladeb? (13) Where is King May-
mon? Where are [his ministers] Hassaybi, Albunalich, Haibalidech, and Yas-
fla? Where is King Barthan? Where are his ministers Thaadas, Caudas, and 
259 Gershom Scholem asserts that this indirect form of  addressing the spirits is an 
indication of Arabic influence (“Some Sources of Jewish-Arabic Demonology,” Journal of 
Jewish Studies 15 (1965): 1-13, cited in Mesler 2012 p. 142 n91.)
260 See below, 13, 17, 21, 25, 33, and CXIX.2. SSM L.3.f.31: thaadas, caaudas, yarabal.


--- PAGE 253 ---
sworn book of honorius
252
eius ministri? (14) Omnes cicius quam poteritis venite cum omnibus sub-
ditis vestris promti michi in omnibus obedire. Virtus summi creatoris vos 
subiuget, que vos venire constringat.” 
(15) Excitacio diei Martis et spirituum eius,  
quando perticulariter fit. 
Tunc in meridie dicat: “Ubi est Iammax rex, ubi sunt Carmox, Ycanol, Pas-
fran eius ministri? (16) Ubi est Sarabocres rex, ubi sunt Nassar, Cynassa 
eius ministri? Ubi est Harthan rex, ubi sunt Bileth, Milalu, Abucaba eius 
ministri? Ubi est Abaa rex, ubi sunt Hyici, Quyron, Zach, Eladeb eius min[i]
stri? (17) Ubi est Maymon rex, ubi sunt Assaibi, Albunalich, Aybalidech, 
Yasfla eius ministri? Ubi est Barthan rex, ubi sunt Thaadas, Caudas, Yalcal 
eius ministri? (18) Ubi est Formione rex, ubi sunt Guth, Maguth, Guthryn 
eius ministri? Vos invoco venire cum excercitu vestro et meis questionibus 
obedire. Timor furoris Domini vos convincat, qui vos venire et obedire 
constringat.”
(19) Excitacio diei Veneris et spirituum eius,  
quando particulariter fit. 
Tunc in nogahem dicat: “Ubi est Sarabocres rex, ubi sunt Nassar, Cynassa 
eius ministri? (20) Ubi est Harthan rex, ubi sunt Bileth, Milalu, Abucaba 
eius ministri? Ubi est Abaa rex, ubi sunt Hyici, Quiron, Zach, Eladeb eius 
ministri? Ubi est Maymon rex, ubi sunt Assaiby, Albunalich, Haybalidech, 
Yasfla eius ministri? (21) Ubi est Barthan rex, ubi sunt Taadas, Caudas, Yal-
cal eius ministri? Ubi est Formione rex, ubi sunt Guth, Maguth, Guthryn 
eius ministri? Ubi est Iammax rex, ubi sunt Carmox, Ycanol, Pasfran eius 
ministri? (22) Venite obedientes cum omnibus subditis vestris creatori 
vestro et michi nomine ipsius. Exercitus angelorum, qui Sabaoth dicitur, 
vos meis preceptis subiciat.” 
(23) Excitacio diei Lune et spirituum eius,  
quando perticulariter fit.
Tunc in occidente dicat: “Ubi est Harthan rex, ubi sunt Bileth, Mylalu, Abu-
caba eius ministri? (24) Ubi est Abaa rex, ubi sunt Hyici, Quyron, Zach, 


--- PAGE 254 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
253
Yalcal? (14) Come as quickly as you are able, with all your subordinates, pre-
pared to obey me in all things. The power of the most high Creator subjugates 
you, that you are constrained to come.”
(15) The raising up of the day of Mars, and  
the spirits which are particular to it.
Then facing south, say: “Where is King Iammax? Where are his ministers 
Carmox, Ycanol, and Pasfran? (16) Where is King Sarabocres? Where are his 
ministers Nassar and Cynassa? Where is King Harthan? Where are his minis-
ters Bileth, Milalu, and Abucaba? Where is King Abaa? Where are his minis-
ters Hyici, Quyron, Zach, and Eladeb? (17) Where is King Maymon? Where 
are his ministers Assaibi, Albunalich, Aybalidech, and Yasfla? Where is King 
Barthan? Where are his ministers Thaadas, Caudas, and Yalcal? (18) Where is 
King Formione? Where are his ministers Guth, Maguth, and Guthryn? I call 
upon you to come with your army and to obey my requests. May the fear of 
the wrath of the Lord conquer, who binds you to come and obey.”
(19) The raising up of the day of Venus, and  
the spirits particular to it.
Then in Nogahem, say: “Where is King Sarabocres? Where are his ministers 
Nassar and Cynassa? (20) Where is King Harthan? Where are his ministers 
Bileth, Milalu, and Abucaba? Where is King Abaa? Where are his ministers 
Hyici, Quiron, Zach, and Eladeb? Where is King Maymon? Where are his 
ministers Assaiby, Albunalich, Haybalidech, and Yasfla? (21) Where is King 
Barthan? Where are his ministers Taadas, Caudas, and Yalcal? Where is King 
Formione? Where are his ministers Guth, Maguth, and Guthryn? Where is 
King Iammax? Where are his ministers Carmox, Ycanol, and Pasfran? (22) 
Come with all your subordinates, obeying your creator and me in his name. 
The army of angels, which is called Sabaoth, makes you subject to my orders.”
(23) The raising up of the day of the Moon, and  
the spirits which are particular to it.
Then, facing west, he should say: “Where is King Harthan? Where are Bileth, 
Mylalu, Abucaba, his ministers? (24) Where is King Abaa? Where are Hyici, 


--- PAGE 255 ---
sworn book of honorius
254
Eladeb eius ministri? Ubi est Maymon rex, ubi sunt Assaibi, Albunalich, 
Haibalidech, Yasfla eius ministri? (25) Ubi est Barthan rex, ubi sunt Taadas, 
Caudas, Yalcal eius ministri? Ubi est Formione rex, ubi sunt Guth, Maguth, 
Guthrin eius ministri? (26) Ubi est Iammax rex, ubi sunt Carmox, Ycanol, 
Pasfran eius ministri? Ubi est Sarabocres rex, ubi sunt Nassar, Cynassa eius 
ministri? (27) <Ubi est harthan rex. Ubi sunt bileth. mylalu. abucaba eius 
ministri. Ubi est abaa rex. Ubi sunt hyci. quyron. zach. eladeb. eius minis-
tri.> [Venite omnes quam cicius poteritis cum omnibus subditus vestris et 
ut supra.]53
(28) Excitacio diei Mercurii et spirituum eius,  
quando particulariter fit. 
Tunc in frigicap dicat: “Ubi est Abaa rex, ubi sunt Hyici, Quiron, Zach, 
Eladeb ministri eius? (29) Ubi est Maymon rex, ubi sunt Assaibi, Albuna-
lich, Haibalidech, Yasfla eius ministri? [Ubi est Barthan rex, ubi sunt Taa-
das, Caudas, Yalcal eius ministri?] Ubi est Formione rex, ubi sunt Guth, 
Maguth, Guthryn eius ministri? (30) Ubi est Iammax rex, ubi sunt Carmox, 
Ycanol, Pasfran eius ministri? Ubi est Sarabocres rex, ubi sunt Nassa[r], 
Cynassa eius ministri? (31) Ubi est Harthan rex, ubi sunt Bileth, Mylalu, 
Abucaba eius ministri? Summum Dei tremendum ac reverendum iudi-
cium vos apparere et michi in omnibus obedire constringat.”
(32) Excitacio diei sabati et spirituum eius,  
quando particulariter fit. 
Tunc in septemtrione dicat: “Ubi est Maymon rex, ubi sunt Assaibi, Albu-
nalich, Haibalidech, Iasfla eius ministri? (33) Ubi est Barthan rex, ubi sunt 
Taadas, Caudas, Yalcal eius ministri? Ubi est Formione rex, ubi sunt Guth, 
Maguth, Guthryn eius ministri? (34) Ubi est Iammax rex, ubi sunt Car-
mox, Ycanol, Pasfran eius ministri? Ubi est Sarabocres rex, ubi sunt Nassar, 
Cynassa<r> eius ministri? Ubi [est] Harthan rex, ubi sunt Bileth, Mylalu, 
53 Namely, “... promti michi in omnibus obedire. Virtus summi creatoris vos subiuget, que 
vos venire constringat.” So Sl. 3853 fol 153r. GH, following Sl, 3854, omits. Compare SSM, 
which cites Beelzebub. Evidence the London Honorius has had chief daemons redacted 
out?


--- PAGE 256 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
255
Quyron, Zach, Eladeb his ministers? Where is King Maymon? Where are 
Assaibi, Albunalich, Haibalidech, Yasfla his ministers? (25) Where is King 
Barthan? Where are Taadas, Caudas, Yalcal his ministers? Where is King 
Formione? Where are Guth, Maguth, Guthrin his ministers? (26) Where is 
King Iammax? Where are Carmox, Ycanol, Pasfran his ministers? Where is 
King Sarabocres? Where are Nassar, Cynassa his ministers? (27) <...> [Come 
as quickly as you are able, with all your subordinates, prepared to obey me in 
all things. The power of the most high Creator subjugates you, that you are 
constrained to come,” etc. as above.]
(28) The raising up of the day of Mercury, and the  
spirits which are particular to it.
Then in frigicap, say: ‘Where is King Abaa? Where are his ministers Hyici, 
Quiron, Zach, and Eladeb? (29) Where is King Maymon? Where are his 
ministers Assaibi, Albunalich, Haibalidech, and Yasfla? [Where is King Bar-
than? Where are his ministers Taadas, Caudas, and Yalcal?] Where is King 
Formione? Where are his ministers Guth, Maguth, and Guthryn? (30) Where 
is King Iammax? Where are his ministers Carmox, Ycanol, and Pasfran? 
Where is King Sarabocres? Where are his ministers Nassa[r] and Cynassa? 
(31) Where is King Harthan? Where are his ministers Bileth, Mylalu, and 
Abucaba? The most high, terrible, and awe-inspiring judgment of God binds 
you to appear and to obey me in all things.”
(32) The raising up of the Sabbath day, and the  
spirits which are particular to it.
Then facing north, say: “Where is King Maymon? Where are his ministers 
Assaibi, Albunalich, Haibalidech, and Iasfla? (33) Where is King Barthan? 
Where are his ministers Taadas, Caudas, and Yalcal? Where is King Formione? 
Where are his ministers Guth, Maguth, and Guthryn? (34) Where is King 
Iammax? Where are his ministers Carmox, Ycanol, and Pasfran? Where is 


