SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii ŌĆö the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 15/28  |  CHARS: 333880-358167 of 659348
============================================================

weet, O God most high, O glorious God, O immeasurable God, O 
almighty God, O God, the Father of all mercy, (2) I, although unworthy and 
full of iniquity, deceit, and vice, I come humbly begging and pleading for your 
mercy, that you donŌĆÖt consider all my countless sins, but just as you are accus-
tomed to show mercy on sinners, and to hear the prayers of the humble, (3) so 
too deign to hear me, your servant N., although unworthy, crying to you for 
this most holy and divine vision, humbly and most earnestly, asking it of you 
140 A variation of this prayer can be found in BoO p. 100, also in Forbidden Rites, p. 259. 
The holy names, Hosel, Iesel, etc. are found in Ars. Not, JV p. 211. Apart from this, neither 
prayer 33 nor 34 seem to occur in Ars. Not.
141 Ps. 40:5 (Vulgate).


--- PAGE 173 ---
sworn book of honorius
172
(’£┤) ut virtutem et graciam, quam pro tanta visione habere debeo, habeam, 
scilicet puritatem et innocenciam et claritatem, sapienciam et sanctitatem, 
(’£Ą) caritatem et sinceritatem et humilitatem et ’¼ürmitatem et bonam volun-
tatem, te ipso prestante, qui sedes in altissimis, cui laus est atque gloria et 
honor per in’¼ünita secula seculorum. Amen. 
XCVII 
Si seriem harum oracionum scire vis, respice seriem ’£▒’£░’£░ nominum Dei 
huius libri, quia per illa semper incipiunt oraciones. (’£▓) Et nota, quod illa 
sacra Dei nomina predicta: Hosel, Iesel et cetera, debent dici paulo post 
principium orandi eciam in principio cuiuslibet oracionis.
XCVIII I’Ø«’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø░’Ø®’Ø┤ ’£▓’ØĪ ’ØŁ’ØĄ’Ø«’Øż’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» ’Ø®’Ø« ’ØČ’Ø®’Ø│’Ø®’Ø»’Ø«’Øź ’Øż’Ø®’ØČ’Ø®’Ø«’ØĪ. 
Mundato igitur et macerato corpore volentis videre celeste palacium 
ipsum mundissimum esse iubemus et in omnibus virtutibus esse vestitum, 
(’£▓) et semper cogitet et deprecetur Dominum de suorum absolucione pec-
catorum, quia iustus eciam debet timere, quia qui non timet, non diligit, 
testante Salomone et dicente: ŌĆ£Inicium sapiencie timor Domini,ŌĆØ18 (’£│) unde 
quilibet debet timere, quia nemo ex sua condicione vel dignitate meretur 
vel consequitur gloriam vel salutem nec potest videre Deum absque gracia 
salvatoris.
(’£┤) Et iterum alios ’£▒’£▓ dies in pane et aqua integre sine aliqua relaxa-
cione ieiunet faciens ut fecerat in predictis, donec veniat ad ’£▒’£│am diem, que 
sit dies Iovis, et tunc iterum, si quid in se mali senserit, emundet et tunc 
iterum corpus Christi recipiat dicendo: 
’£▒’£Ė Sir. ’£▒:’£▒’£Č, based on Proverbs ’£╣:’£▒’£░.


--- PAGE 174 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
173
with prayers and embellished with holy sacraments, which are Hosel, Iesel, 
etc. (4) that I may have the virtue and the grace which are needed to attain 
such a great vision, namely purity, innocence, clarity, wisdom, and piety, (5) 
love, sincerity, humility, determination, and good will, through you, who sits 
on high, to whom be praise, glory, and honor, forever and ever. Amen.
XCVII.
If you wish to know the sequence of these prayers, consider the sequence of 
the one hundred names of God in this book, because the prayers always begin 
with those. (2) And note, that those preceding sacred names of God: Hosel, 
Iesel, and the rest, must be said soon after beginning worship, and also in the 
beginning of any specific prayer.
XCVIII. Here begins the second  
purification for the Divine Vision.142
Thereupon, with the body purified and softened,143 he that wishes to see the 
heavenly palace, we command him to keep himself most clean to be clothed 
with all virtues, (2) and he should always contemplate the Lord, and pray for 
the forgiveness of sins, for the Lord is just and must be feared, for if you donŌĆÖt 
fear him, you donŌĆÖt love him, as Solomon testified when he said: ŌĆ£The begin-
ning of wisdom is the fear of the Lord,ŌĆØ144 (3) Therefore, everyone should fear 
him, because nobody attains glory, or salvation, or the sight of God, of his 
own merit, without the grace of the savior. 
(4) And again he should fast another twelve days on bread and water and 
nothing else, without any relaxation as he did before, until he comes to the 
thirteenth day, which should be a Thursday, and then again, if he perceives 
any evil in himself he should cleanse it, and then again he should receive the 
body of Christ, saying:
142 The instructions for the first purification are given in chapters li-lii.
143 Namely, the physical passions conquered.
144 Sir. 1:16, based on Proverbs 9:10. Compare Key of Solomon, chapter 1. http://
esotericarchives.com/solomon/ksol.htm#chap1 (retrieved October 15, 2015)


--- PAGE 175 ---
sworn book of honorius
174
(’£Ą) O’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» ’ØĪ’Ø«’Ø┤’Øź ’Ø▓’Øź’ØŻ’Øź’Ø░’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø»’Ø«’Øź’ØŁ C’Ø©’Ø▓’Ø®’Ø│’Ø┤’Ø® 
ŌĆ£Tu, Domine Iesu Christe, salvator omnium, qui pro me, miserimo pecca-
tore, et aliis in seculo viventibus voluisti corpus tuum salubriter immolare, 
(’£Č) qui ’£Ąa die, scilicet Iovis [vel] Cenacionis, beatos apostolos tuos de tuo 
precioso corpore et sanguine saciasti precipiens, ut in nomine tuo sancta 
mater ecclesia sacratissimum corpus tuum et sanguinem consecraret, ut 
’¼üeret salus et vita animarum in te credencium. (’£Ę) Ego, licet indignus, te, 
Domine Iesu Christe, recipiens, sciens et con’¼ütens te Dominum meum et 
creatorem meum, quem in carne mea visurus sum ego ipse et non alius, 
quem expecto iudicem meum venturum, (’£Ė) concede michi propicius et 
in virtute huius sacri misterii, quod sicut corporeis oculis tuam spiritu-
alem et corporalem potenciam ac eciam divinitatem visibiliter con’¼üteor et 
agnosco per redempcionem huius sacratissimi corporis et sanguinis tui, (’£╣) 
sic corpus meum clari’¼ücare et mundare digneris, ut abluto corpore te visi-
biliter cum tuis novem angelorum ordinibus me vivente mea possit anima 
collaudare, qui vivis et regnas Deus per omnia secula seculorum. Amen.ŌĆØ 
XCIX 
Quo recepto recedas ad domum et taliter opus incipies. 
P’Ø¼’ØĪ’ØŻ’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» ’Øż’Ø®’ØČ’Ø®’Ø«’Øź ’ØŁ’ØĪ’Ø®’Øź’Ø│’Ø┤’ØĪ’Ø┤’Ø®’Ø│ 
Dices illa die Iovis semel psalterium et letaniam cum propriis eam sequenti-
bus oracionibus. Post dices ’£▓’£Ą, ’£▓’£Č, ’£│’£▒ et ibi addes: 
(’£▓) ŌĆ£Ut tu, Domine, per annunciacionem, concepcionem, nativitatem, 
circumcisionem, predicacionem, baptismum, resurreccionem, ascensio-
nem beatissimi ’¼ülii tui, Domini nostri Iesu Christi, (’£│) corpus meum clari-
’¼ücare et mundare digneris, ut abluto corpore te visibiliter cum tuis novem 
dictis angelorum ordinibus me vivente mea possit anima collaudare,ŌĆØ (’£┤)ŌĆö
conclusio:ŌĆöŌĆ£quoniam tu es Deus potens et super omnia misericors, qui 


--- PAGE 176 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
175
(5) Prayer before receiving Christ.
ŌĆ£You, O Lord Jesus Christ, the savior of all, who were willing to sacrifice your 
body, on behalf of me, a wretched sinner, and others living in the world, (6) 
you who on the fifth day, namely Thursday, the Last Supper, fed your blessed 
apostles with your precious body and blood, teaching them that they should 
consecrate your most holy body and blood in the name of the holy mother 
church, in order that it might be the salvation and life of the souls believing in 
you. (7) I, although unworthy to receive you, O Lord Jesus Christ, knowing 
and confessing you to be my Lord and my creator, whom I shall see, and no 
other, while my body lives, whom I await to judge me soon, (8) grant me your 
favor, and by the virtue of this sacred mystery, that as I am able to recognize 
visibly and acknowledge with my physical eyes your spiritual and physical 
power, and  even your divinity, through the redemption145 of this your most 
sacred body and blood, (9) so deign to clarify and cleanse my body, that with 
my body being washed, my soul will able to praise you visibly, while I live, 
along with your nine orders of angels, you who lives and reigns, God, world 
without end. Amen.ŌĆØ
XCIX.
Once this146 has been received, you may retire to your house and begin the 
work in such a manner. 
The placating of the Divine Majesty. 
The same Thursday, you will say the psalter and litany with its special 
prayers following it. After that you will say 25, 26,147 31 then add: (2) ŌĆ£... that 
you, O Lord, by the annunciation, conception, birth, circumcision, procla-
mation, baptism,148 resurrection, and ascension of your most blessed son, our 
Lord Jesus Christ, (3) deign to make my body lustrous and pure, that with 
my body washed pure, my soul may be able to praise you visibly, while I live, 
alongside your aforesaid nine orders of angels,ŌĆØ (4) The conclusion: ŌĆ£Because 
145 SSM: receptionem (ŌĆ£receptionŌĆØ), referring to the eucharist, which seems to fit better.
146 I.e. the Eucharist. SSM: The Body of Christ.
147 SSM: 28.
148 SSM adds: ŌĆ£fasting, dining, suffering.ŌĆØ


--- PAGE 177 ---
sworn book of honorius
176
vivis et regnas Deus in unitate et trinitate, Pater et Filius et Spiritus sanc-
tus, et regnaturus es per in’¼ünita secula seculorum. Amen.ŌĆØ 
C Separacio
Ex nunc eris in loco concluso, ubi non sit frequentacio personarum, et qua-
libet die dices istas oraciones, que secuntur, cum precedentibus, que perti-
nent operanti, et cum hoc dices hec nomina, que secuntur. (’£▓) ŌĆ£Agla, Mon-
hon, Tetragramaton, Ely Deus, Ocleiste, Amphynethon, Lamyara, Iane-
myer, Sadyon, Hely, Horlon, Porrenthimon, (’£│) Yelur, Gofgameli, Emanuel, 
On, Admyel, Honzmorb, Ioht, Hophob, Mesamarathon, Anethy, Eryona, 
Yuestre, Saday, Maloht, Sechce.ŌĆØ
(’£┤) Post hoc dices: 
O’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
ŌĆ£Deus meus, Pater omnipotens eterne potestatis, potens facere mundum 
de immundo conceptum semine, Primellus, Principium, Primogenitus, 
Sapiencia, Virtus, Sol, Splendor, Gloria, Pax, Lux, Panis, Os, (’£Ą) Verbum, 
Salus, Angelus, Sponsus, Propheta, Agnus, Ovis, Vitulus, Serpens, Aries, 
Leo, Vermis, exaudi propicius oraciones et invocaciones servi tui, ut in vir-
tute horum sanctorum nominum tuorum corpus meumŌĆØ et cetera. 
(’£Č) Postea dices ista alia nomina, que secuntur. ŌĆ£Elscha fortis, Abba-
dia iuste, Alpha et ╬® piissime, Leiste dulcissime, Oristyon potentissime, 
Yeremon excellentissime, Hofbor excelse, Merkerpon adiutor, Elzephares 


--- PAGE 178 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
177
you, O God, are mighty and merciful over all, who lives and reigns, God in 
unity and trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and will reign forever, world 
without end. Amen.ŌĆØ149
C. Separation.
From this time on you should be in a place where access can be restricted, 
where people do not frequent, and each day say those prayers which follow, 
along with those preceding, which are pertinent to the work,150 and with 
this you should say these names, which follow: (2) ŌĆ£Agla, Monhon, Tetra-
gramaton, Ely Deus, Ocleiste, Amphynethon, Lamyara, Ianemyer, Sadyon, 
Hely, Horlon, Porrenthimon, (3) Yelur, Gofgameli, Emanuel, On, Admyel, 
Honzmorb, Ioht, Hophob, Mesamarathon, Anethy, Eryona, Yuestre, Saday, 
Maloht, Sechce.ŌĆØ151
(4) After this, say:
Prayer.
ŌĆ£O my God, almighty Father, eternal power, who can make pure that which 
was conceived of unclean seed, Primellus, the Beginning, the First-Born, the 
Wisdom, the Virtue, the Sun, the Brilliance, the Glory, the Peace, the Light, 
the Bread,152 the Mouth, (5) the Word, the Salvation, the Angel, the Bride-
groom, the Prophet, the Lamb, the Sheep, the Calf, the Serpent, Aries, Leo, 
the Worm, hear clearly the propitious prayers and invocations of your servant, 
that through the power of your holy names, that with my bodyŌĆØ etc.153
(6) Then say these additional names which follow: ŌĆ£Strong Elscha, 
just Abbadia, most pious Alpha and Omega, sweetest Leiste, most potent 
Oristyon, most excellent Yeremon, lofty Hofbor,154 Merkerpon the helper, 
Elzephares the defender, Egyryon the protector, Pheta the generous, (7) hear 
149 The wording of this prayer should be adapted to the situation; in this case, for the 
divine vision. See CII, and Veenstra 2012 pp. 166ŌĆō167.
150 SSM adds: ŌĆ£and not to the priesthood.ŌĆØ
151 Compare with similar lists of names of God in chapters C.2, CI.2ŌĆō8.
152 GH following S. 3854 127r reads ŌĆ£Patris,ŌĆØ but SSM L.4.f.17, Sl. 313, Sl. 3853 144r, and 
R all read ŌĆ£Panis,ŌĆØ which is also consistent with BoO p. 35.
153 As in XCVIII.9.
154 So GH. Sl. 3854 127r reads ŌĆ£Hosbor,ŌĆØ but see XCVI 1 and CI.4. SSM: Hospr; Sl. 3885: 
hostor.


--- PAGE 179 ---
sworn book of honorius
178
defensor, Egyryon protector, Pheta largitor, (7) exaudi benigne deprecacio-
nes servi tui, ut ex dono gracie tue per intercessiones beate genitricis tue 
virginis Marie et angelorum et archangelorum tuorum Michaelis, Gabri-
elis, Urielis et Raphaelis et omnium aliorum celestium angelorum (8) et 
apostolorum tuorum Petri et Pauli, Iohannis et Iacobi, Andree, Mathie, 
Symonis, Iude, Philippi, Thome, Bartholomei et Barnabe corpus meumŌĆØ 
et cetera. 
(9) Postea dices ista sequencia nomina Dei. ŌĆ£Ombonar ineffabilis, Stim-
ulamathon in substancia invisibilis, Oryon inestimabilis, Erion inpermuta-
bilis, Noymos clementissime, Pep incommensurabilis, Nathanatay incor-
ruptibilis, Theon inmense, Ysiston gloriose, Porho tocius misericordie.ŌĆØ19
(10) Postea dices hanc oracionem: 
O’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
ŌĆ£Respice humiliter preces humilis servi tui non aspiciens neque vindicans 
inennarrabiles iniquitates, quas contra te feci; quoniam, ŌĆśsi iniquitates 
observaveris, quis sustinebit?ŌĆÖ (11) Set tu, Domine, ŌĆśsuscitans a terra inopem 
et de stercore erigens pauperemŌĆÖ in virtute sancte humilitatis et obediencie 
tue, sicut dicitur: (12) ŌĆśfactus est obediens usque ad mortemŌĆÖŌĆöet alibi: ŌĆśEgo 
autem humiliatus sum nimisŌĆÖŌĆöquam pro peccatoribus humiliter pati atque 
recipere voluisti, sic preces meas placatus recipiasŌĆö(13) quia confiteor et 
scio, quia tu es misericors tocius creature te firmiter invocantis, testante 
David et dicente: ŌĆśCor contritum et humiliatum Deus non despicies,ŌĆÖ (14) et 
alibi: ŌĆśPrope est Dominus omnibus invocantibus eum in veritateŌĆÖŌĆöut ani-
mam meam a tenebris corpusculi mei suscitare et a stercore peccatorum 
meorum erigere digneris, ut abluto corporeŌĆØ et cetera. 
(15) Et postea dices hec nomina hanc sequentem oracionem constitu-
encia. 
19 SSM: ŌĆ”  Eryon incomutabilis, Nomyx, clementissime, Pele, incommensurabilis, 
Nathanatoy incorruptibilis, Theon inmense, ysyston, gloriose, Porhe tocius misericordie


--- PAGE 180 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
179
kindly the supplications of your servant, so that from your gift of grace through 
the intercession of your blessed mother, the virgin Mary, and of your angels 
and archangels Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, and Raphael, and all other celestial 
angels (8) and of your apostles Peter and Paul, John and Jacob, Andrew, Mat-
thew, Simon, Jude, Philip, Thomas, Bartholomew, and Barnabus, that with 
my body ...ŌĆØ etc.155
(9) Then say these following names of God: ŌĆ£Ombonar ineffable, Stimu-
lamathon in substance invisible, Oryon inestimable, Erion unchangeable, 
Noymos most merciful, Pep immeasurable, Nathanatay incorruptible, Theon 
immeasurable, Hysiston glorious, Porho altogether merciful.ŌĆØ
(10) Then say this prayer:
Prayer.
ŌĆ£Look favorably on the prayers of your humble servant, not considering or 
punishing the many sins which I have committed against you; for, ŌĆśif you con-
sider our sins, who could measure up?ŌĆÖ156 (11) But you, O Lord, ŌĆśraise up the 
needy from the dust, and the poor from the filthŌĆÖ157 by virtue of holy humil-
ity and obedience to you, as it is said: (12) ŌĆśHe became obedient even unto 
deathŌĆÖ158 and elsewhere: ŌĆśmoreover I have been greatly humbledŌĆÖ159ŌĆöwhich 
you humbly allowed and wished to receive for sinners, so may you favorably 
receive my prayersŌĆö(13) because I confess and know that you are merciful to 
all creatures who call upon you sincerely, which David testified when he said: 
ŌĆśA contrite and humbled heart, O God, you will not look down on,ŌĆÖ160 (14) 
and elsewhere: ŌĆśThe Lord is nearby to all who faithfully call upon himŌĆÖ161ŌĆö
that you may deign to awaken my soul from the darkness of my body, and 
raise it up from the foulness of my sins, that with my body being washedŌĆØ and 
so on.162
(15) And then say these names composed in the following prayer:
155 Adding your petition, as in XCVIII.9.
156 Ps. 129:3 (KJV 130:3).
157 Ps. 112:7 (KJV 113:7).
158 Phi. 2:8.
159 Ps. 115:1 (KJV 116:10).
160 Ps. 50:19 (KJV 51:17).
161 Ps. 144:18 (KJV 145:18).
162 As in XCVIII.9.


--- PAGE 181 ---
sworn book of honorius
180
Nomina Dei vivi
ŌĆ£Fothon, celi et terre conditor; Lethellete, qui celum super altitudinem 
nubium extendisti; Ysmas, qui terram super aquas in sua stabilitate fun-
dasti; (’£▒’£Č) Adonay, qui mari terminum suum, quem preterire non pot-
erit, tribuisti; Hachionadabir, qui Solem et Lunam et omnes stellas celi 
in summa arce collocasti; Omytheon, qui omnia in sapiencia fecisti; (’£▒’£Ę) 
Hofga, qui sexta die hominem ad ymaginem et similitudinem tuam creasti; 
Leyndra, qui Adam una cum Eva, quam sibi comitem dederas, in paradiso 
voluptatis collocasti, quos propter mandati tui prevaricacionem mox de 
paradiso eiecisti; Nosulaceps, qui victimam Abel conspexisti;
(’£▒’£Ė) Tutheon, qui mundum propter sui scelera in aqua diluvii perdidisti; 
Gelemoht, qui Noe et eos, qui cum eo erant in aqua diluvii, salvasti, unde 
genus humanum restituisti; (’£▒’£╣) Paraclitus, qui Abrahe, servo tuo, sub tri-
plici persona ad radicem Mambre aparuisti; Occynonerion, qui Enoch et 
Helyam ad pugnandum contra tirannum in celis rapuisti; Ectothas, qui 
Loth, servum tuum, de submersione Sodome et Gomorre misericorditer 
liberasti; (’£▓’£░) Abracio, qui Moysi, servo tuo, in medio rubi locutus fuisti in 
’¼éamma ignis; Anephenethon, qui virgam Aaron frondere, ’¼éorere et fruc-
tum producere fecisti; (’£▓’£▒) Abdon, qui populum tuum de terra Egypti de 
captivitate potenter abduxisti; Melthe, qui, ut siccis pedibus transirent, per 
medium mare viam aperuisti; Sother, qui in monte Synay populo tuo per 
manum Moysi legem dedisti;
(’£▓’£▓) Usyrion, qui populo scicienti de petra sicca nimias aquas exire 
fecisti; Baruch, qui Danielem prophetam de lacu leonum sanum et incol-
umem eripuisti; Sporgongo, qui tres pueros Sydrac, Misaac et Abdenago, 
qui sunt Ananyas, Azarias et Mysael, de camino ignis ardentis illesos abire 


--- PAGE 182 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
181
Names of the Living God.
ŌĆ£Fothon, creator of Heaven and Earth; Lethelletus, whereby you stretched 
out Heaven above the height of the clouds; Ysmas, whereby you set the lands 
firmly upon the waters; (16) Adonay, whereby you separated the sea from her 
bounds, which she is not able to go beyond; Hachionadabir, whereby you 
arranged the Sun and Moon and all the stars in the highest height of Heaven; 
Omytheon, whereby you made all things in wisdom;163 (17) Hofga, Whereby 
on the sixth day you created mankind in your own image and likeness; Leyn-
dra, whereby you put Adam into the Paradise of pleasure, together with Eve, 
whom you gave as his companion, whereby you also soon expelled them from 
Paradise for transgressing your commandment; Nosulaceps, whereby you 
accepted AbelŌĆÖs offering;
(18) Tutheon, whereby you caused a flood of water to destroy the world, 
on account of its corruption; Gelemoht, whereby you saved Noah, and those 
who were with him, from the destruction of the flood, and whereby you 
restored mankind; (19) Paraclitus, whereby you appeared to Abraham, your 
servant, in the guise of three persons, in the plains of Mamre;164 Occynoner-
ion, whereby you took Enoch and Elijah to Heaven for fighting against the 
tyrant;165 Ectothas, whereby Lot, your servant, was mercifully spared from 
the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah;166 (20) Abracio, whereby you 
spoke to Moses, your servant, in the midst of the burning bush; Anephene-
thon, whereby you made the staff of Aaron sprout leaves and produce fruit;167 
(21) Abdon, whereby you forcefully led your people out of the land of Egypt, 
and out of captivity; Melthe, whereby you opened a path through the middle 
of the sea, allowing them to cross with dry feet; Sother, whereby you gave 
your people the Law at Mount Sinai, through the hand of Moses;
(22) Usyrion, whereby you produced much water for your thirsty 
people, from a dry rock; Baruch, whereby you released the prophet Daniel 
from lionsŌĆÖ den safe and unharmed;168 Sporgongo, whereby the three chil-
dren Shadrach, Meshach, and Abedenego, who were Hananiah, Azariah and 
163 Ps. 103:24 (KJV 104:24).
164 Gen. 18:1ŌĆō2.
165 Gen. 5:24; II Kings 2:11.
166 Gen 19.
167 Num. 17:8.
168 Dan. 6.


--- PAGE 183 ---
sworn book of honorius
182
fecisti; (’£▓’£│) Genouem, qui Susannam bonam ’¼üduciam atque spem in te 
habentem de falso crimine falsorum iudicum liberasti; Messias, qui Ionam 
prophetam in ventre ceti tribus diebus et tribus noctibus commorantem 
incolumem conservasti; (’£▓’£┤) Pantheon, qui David prophetam de mani-
bus Golie invictum evadere fecisti; Deus iustus, fortis et paciens, agyos, 
Otheos, Hiskyros, athanathos, eleyson ymas, Christus, Deus fortis, 
omnipotens et immortalis, (’£▓’£Ą) Iesus Nazarenus, et multum misericors, 
qui solum ex vera cordis contricione peccatorem mundi’¼ücas, exaudi cle-
mens et propicius oraciones servi tui, (’£▓’£Č) quas in virtute sublimitatis tue 
profero, ut per misericordiam tuam <et> graciam, quam sanctis tuis tri-
buisti, michi largiri digneris.
(’£▓’£Ę) Descendat ergo, Domine, super me, famulum tuum, quamvis 
multis criminibus irretitum tamen a te creatum, virtus Spiritus sancti, que 
meorum indulgenciam faciat peccatorum, ut ex rore celesti mei corpusculi 
macule deleantur, ut abluto corporeŌĆØ et cetera. 
(’£▓’£Ė) Hec oracio supradicta debet pro ferri in omni periculo, quoniam 
sanos custodit, in’¼ürmos sanat, peccata relaxat, iratos paci’¼ücat, amicicias 
nutrit, (’£▓’£╣) desperantes confortat, pauperes fovet, iram Domini mitigat, 
omnes tribulaciones et perversitates vincit, tempestates fugat, incantacio-
nes solvit, spiritus constringit et ligat. (’£│’£░) Debet proferri ieiuno stomacho, 
’¼éexis genibus cum devocione maxima, et eius abstinencia est, quod oper-
ans debet esse humilis, paciens et pudicus. (’£│’£▒) Taliter igitur diebus Ven-
eris, sabbati, Dominico, Lune, Martis, Mercurii sequentibus hec omnia, et 
ter in qualibet die, scilicet mane, meridie et sero, integre recitabis. 
CI Perfeccio operis 
Die vero Iovis sumo mane dicat ut dixerat in predictis et tunc super cineres 
de fece mundatos de feno cubile faciat, et in circuitu lecti sint in cineribus 
scripta centum nomina Dei.


--- PAGE 184 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
183
Mishael, were able to come forth uninjured from the fiery furnace;169 (23) 
Genovem, whereby the good and faithful Susanna, having hope in you, was 
freed from false accusations of false judges; Messias, whereby you preserved 
the prophet Jonah unharmed for three days and three nights in the stomach 
of a whale; (24) Pantheon, whereby you made the prophet David escape the 
hands of Goliath unconquered;170 O Just God, strong and patient, Agios, 
Iskiros, Athanatos, Eleyson ymas, Christus, strong God, all-powerful and 
immortal, (25) Jesus of Nazareth, most merciful, who cleanses us of sins only 
through a truly contrite heart, O merciful and generous one, hear the prayers 
of your servant, (26) which I offer through the virtue of your sublimity, so 
that through your mercy, you would deign to grant to me the grace which you 
have granted to your saints. 
(27) Therefore, O Lord, may the power of the Holy Spirit descend upon 
me, your servant, in spite of my many faults, yet created by you, who may 
show leniency for my sins, that the stains of my body are erased by the heav-
enly dew, that my body being washedŌĆØ etc.
(28) This above-mentioned prayer should used in all dangers, because it 
protects the health, cures the sick, forgives sins, calms anger, nurtures friend-
ship, (29) comforts those despairing, warms the poor, mitigates the wrath of 
the Lord, conquers all troubles and perversities, drives away storms, breaks 
enchantments, and constrains and binds spirits. (30) It should be said after 
fasting and abstinence, kneeling with the greatest devotion, and the one who 
performs it must be humble, patient, and chaste. (31) Therefore you should 
recite all of these in their entirety in the same way on the following Friday, 
Saturday, Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday, and three times every 
day, namely in the morning, at noon, and at night.
CI. The Completion of the Work.
On Thursday begin in the morning; saying as you said on the preceding, and 
then you should make a bed of hay, on top of ashes which you should make 
clean from the dregs, and around the bed, in the ashes, should be written the 
one hundred names of God.171
169 Dan. 3.25.
170 1 Sam. 17.
171 In SSM, the seventy-two letters from the Seal of God are used instead.


