SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii — the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 24/28  |  CHARS: 547730-571869 of 659348
============================================================

isti  sunt, qui possunt omnes alios spiritus a thesauris absconditis fugare, 
ligare et constringere, et sunt ministri infernales.
() Princeps eorum est Labadau. Eius coadiutor est Asmodeus, qui 
dat thesaurum indestructibilem cuiuslibet monete. () Motus eorum est 
castrorum ruina, segetum et plantarum exstirpacio. Signum est, quod 
totus mundus videbitur destrui invocanti. () Suﬀumigium eorum est sul-
phur, circulus eorum concavus et rotundus et distet a circulo magistri per 
 pedes.


--- PAGE 280 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
279
CXXXV. The beginning of the way of operating with them.
You can work with the terrestrial spirits using the same method described in 
the preceding work, if the suffumigations and the names are altered, as well as 
the circle and the seals. (2) We will speak about these spirits briefly here. They 
are most ugly and full of all kinds of wickedness. (3) Their nature is to root 
out the roots of trees and crops, to guard and preserve treasures hidden in the 
earth, to cause earthquakes, to destroy the foundations of cities or castles, (4) 
to drag down people into pits or caves, to tempt those who are imprisoned, 
to destroy people, to give precious stones hidden in the earth as desired, and 
to harm anything.
(5) Their bodies are as big as they are high, large and frightening; their feet 
each have ten toes, which have claws like those of reptiles, and they have five 
faces on their heads; (6) One is of a toad, another of a lion, the third of a ser-
pent, the fourth of a dead man mourning and striking, the fifth of an incom-
prehensible man. (7) Two tigers carry them upon their tails. They hold two 
dragons in their hands. Their color is blacker than the deepest black imaginable.
(8) But they are five. Corniger (“horn-bearing”) is king of the south, and 
he has four attendants in the four parts of the world: Trocornifer in the East, 
Malafer in the West, Euiraber in the South, Mulcifer282 in the North. (9) And 
each of them has a hundred legions, and in each legion is 4500 daemons, who 
all obey and are subject to these four, and these four are able to drive away all 
other spirits from hidden treasures, to bind and constrain, and they are the 
ministers of Hell.
(10) Their prince is Labadau. His assistant is Asmodeus, who gives inde-
structible treasure of whatever type of coin.283 (11) Their movement causes the 
ruin of castles, rooting up crops and plants. The sign that they have appeared, 
is that the whole world will seem to be destroyed when they have been 
invoked. (12) Their suffumigation is sulfur; their circle is hollow and round, 
and set apart from the circle of the master by feet nine. 
282 Corniger: “having horns” Compare SSM L.5.f.64: Corniger, Corcornifer, Furcaber, 
Mulcifer, Labadan, Admodeus [sic]. SSM L.5.f.58 ff (cap 4: de oficiis particularibus 
spirituum) lists offices for a long list of daemons, including Corniger, Mulciber, and 
Malafar, with short descriptions of their offices, for example: Mulciber, facit fluctuare 
montaneas velut mare (“Mulciber makes mountains rise up like waves at sea.”).
283 In Leipzig Cod. Mag. 16 p. 162-163 their names read: Corniger, Cornifer, Malafer, 
Furcuber, Lucifer, Acadan, and Asmodaÿ.


--- PAGE 281 ---
sworn book of honorius
280
(13) Sigillum terre 
“{H}oreaua. recolia. narex. axo et abdia. laadia. cauethlegia. byaron. eley-
math. thetanyra. cadulaua.80 (14) Mathia. nysmaria. pergaria. perelyn. per-
nigyn. perlabudyn. perkedusyn. perbatusyn. pergalmegue. garaneu, ut tar-
tari cogerentur.”81
(15) Coaccio eorum sive coniuracio 
“Invoco vos, terree potestates, et invocando coniuro” et cetera, ut supra 
in precedenti opere. Tunc, cum dixerint “Quid vis?,” pete quod vis, et fiet. 
(16) Set melius est scribere peticionem in tegula nova vel tegul[is]82 
cum carbonibus et in eorum ponere circulo, et sic eos non audies nec 
videbis, et tum quicquid petitum fuerit facient in instanti. (17) Et de istis 
nunquam vel raro Christianus se intromittit, nec eorum consilia sunt 
credenda.
(18) Circulus, in quo apparent spiritus.83
80 The c is barely legible, but supported by SSM and Leipzig cod. Mag. 16 p. 166. GH 
reads “adulaua.”
81 SSM L.1.f.23, line 42-L.1.f.24, line 3: Horeana. recholya. nathexaxo. et abdya. laadya. 
Kauecleya. [L.1.f.24] byaron. eleymath. thetanyra. cadulana. mathya. nysmarya. pergarya. 
per elyn. per iugyn. per kabudyn. per kedussyn. per batussyn. per gualmegue. per guaranen, 
ut tartari cogerentur.; L.3.f.59 lines 13-16: Horeana. recolya. nathexaxo. et abdya. laaddya....
82 GH misreads as “vel tegula” and marked as an accretion to be deleted, but it is clear the 
plural was intended, since it speaks of placing them in the circle.
83 Sloane 3854. f. 137r.


--- PAGE 282 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
281
(13) Seal of the earth.
“{H}oreaua, Recolia, Narex, Axo and Abdia, Laadia, Cauethlegia, Byaron, 
Eleymath, Thetanyra, Cadulaua, (14) Mathia, Nysmaria, Pergaria, Perelyn, 
Pernigyn, Perlabudyn, Perkedusyn, Perbatusyn, Pergalmegue, Garaneu, that 
the infernal ones assemble.”
(15) Calling them forth, or the conjuration.
“I call upon you, O powers of the earth, and I invoke and conjure you…” and 
so on, as given in the preceding work. Then, when they have said “what do 
you wish?”, ask what you wish, and it will happen.
(16) But it is better to write the petition on a new tile (or tiles) with char-
coal, and put them in the circle, and thus you will neither hear them nor see 
them, and then whatever you wish they will make happen in an instant. (17) 
And concerning these, a Christian should seldom or never let himself enter 
into dealings with them, nor should their advice be believed.
(18) Circle in which the spirits appear.284
284 Figure of a pit, with label “equalitas terre” (“ground level”).


--- PAGE 283 ---
sworn book of honorius
282
In hac operacione sed84 de angelis terreis duo isti circuli necessarii; () iste 
primus, qui est concavus, est in quo veniunt advocati, set iste secundus est 
planus, in quo invocans stare debet, et debet distare a primo per  pedes. 
() Et de hiis maxime operantur pagani et rarissime Christiani. 
CXXXVI Incipit quintus liber.
(Primum capitulum quinti tractatus) 
Incipit us et ultimus tractatus de exposicione predictorum in generali in 
 primis tractatibus, quia in libro Honorii sunt  tractatus, () primus de 
 GH: “.”


--- PAGE 284 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
283
In this operation, namely regarding the angels of the earth, two circles are 
necessary: (19) The first one is hollow; it is where the ones summoned come, 
but the second should be level, in which the one calling-upon them should 
stand, and it should stand nine feet apart from the first. (20) And it is espe-
cially the pagans who operate with these, and very rarely should Christians.285
CXXXVI. Here Begins Book Five.
(First chapter of the fifth treatise)
Beginning of the fifth and final treatise, concerning the general exposition 
of the preceding in the first four treatises, because in the book of Honorius 
285 From Sloane 3854, f. 137r. Inside is the label “the circle of invocation, and around the 
border are four names of God: Eloy, Sother, Sabaoth, Messias.”


--- PAGE 285 ---
sworn book of honorius
284
visione divina, secundus de angelis bonis, tercius de aereis, quartus de ter-
reis, quintus de exposicione horum. 
() De visione divina; De cognicione potestatis divine; De absolucione 
peccatorum; Ne homo incidat in peccatum mortale; De redempcione 
trium animarum a purgatorio. 
() Omnium autem horum  operum precedencium ordo iacet suo 
modo verissimo situatus. De primo enim iam patet peticio explanata. () 
De secundo autem taliter postulabis: “... ut abluto corpore me vivente mea 
possit anima cum tua incomprehensibili potencia a te cognita cum tuis 
sanctis angelis tuam cognoscere potestatem.” () De ° taliter postulabis: 
“... ut abluto corpore te cum tuis novem angelorum ordinibus me vivente 
mea possit anima collaudare, et meorum concedas veniam peccatorum.” 
() Quarto taliter est dicendum: “... ut abluto corpore dehinc nullam possim 
committere maculam peccatorum, set meo vivente corpore puro corde, 
mente et opere te cum tuis novem angelorum ordinibus mea possit anima 
collaudare” et cetera. () Quinta peticio taliter situetur: “... ut meo abluto 
corpore te <te>cum tuis” et cetera, “... ex tua gracia N, N, N tales a penis 
purgatorii eripias et suorum veniam tribuas peccatorum, () ut ipsi iam 
defuncti tuam possint agnoscere, laudare et gloriﬁcare maiestatem.” Istud 
opus potes novies facere sine ira Dei et qualibet vice, secundum quod pre-
dixi, tres animas impetrabis. () Et scias, quod, de omnibus aliis si eodem 
modo petieris, optinebis. <Vel sic. Ut abluto corpore celestes. igneas. 
aereas. aquaticas et terreas eﬃcaciter possim cognoscere potestates.>85
 GH has this marked defective, but see SSM for sixth variant of the petition.


--- PAGE 286 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
285
there are five treatises, (2) the first concerning the divine vision, the second 
concerning the good angels, the third concerning the aerial (spirits), the 
fourth concerning the terrestrial (spirits), the fifth concerning the exposition 
of these.
(3) Concerning the divine vision; concerning knowledge of divine power; 
concerning the absolution of sins; lest one falls into mortal sin; concerning 
the redemption of three souls from Purgatory.
(4) Moreover, of these five preceding works, their order is set down in 
the most correct manner.286 Concerning the first, the petition is as plainly 
shown. (5) But you should ask for the second in this manner: “... that with 
my body being washed, my soul will be able to understand your incompre-
hensible power, known from you, with your holy angels, while I live.” (6) The 
third should be asked for in this manner: “... that with my body being washed, 
my soul will be able to praise you, side by side with your nine orders of angels, 
while I live, and may you grant a pardon for my sins.” (7) The fourth should 
be said in this manner: “... that with my body being washed, hereafter I will 
not be able to commit the stain of sin, but pure in heart, in mind, and in 
deed, my soul will be able to praise you, side by side with your nine orders of 
the angels, while my body lives” and so forth. (8) The fifth petition should be 
phrased thus: “... that, with my body being washed, side by side with your ...” 
and so forth, “... by your grace, save N., N., and N., from the pains of purga-
tory, and pardon their sins, (9) in order that they being released may be able 
to acknowledge, praise, and glorify your majesty.” You will be able to do this 
work nine times without the wrath of God, and each time you will secure 
three souls by following what I have said above. (10) And you should know 
that, concerning all others you will obtain them if you alter the petition in the 
same manner. <Or thus, “that with my body being washed, I may be able to 
learn the heavenly, fiery, airy, aquatic, and earthly powers effectually.”>
286 Compare CII.1-3.


--- PAGE 287 ---
sworn book of honorius
286
CXXXVII 2m capitulum quinti tractatus de consecracione 
hincausti86 sigilli Dei eterni, vivi et veri operantis
‘{D}eus invisibilis, Deus inestimabilis, Deus ineffabilis, Deus incommutabi-
lis, (2) Deus incoruptibilis, Deus piissime, Deus dulcissime, Deus excelse, 
Deus gloriose, Deus inmense, Deus tocius misericordie, ego, licet indig-
nus—vel: plenus iniquitate, dolo et malicia—, (3) suplex ad tuam venio 
misericordiam orans ac deprecans, ut non respicias ad universa et innu-
merabilia peccata mea set, sicut consuevisti peccatorum misereri et preces 
humilium exaudire, (4) ita me, famulum tuum N, licet indignum, exaudire 
digneris clamantem ad te pro hac benediccione huius creature sanguinis, 
ut ipse aptus et dignus efficiatur pro hincausto sigilli tui sacri et preciosi et 
nominis tui “Semenphoras”, (5) ita ut aptitudinem, quam optinere debet, 
optineat per sanctissimum nomen tuum, quod 4 literis scribitur, ioht, he, 
vau, deleth—Agla, Eloy, Yaym, Theos, Deus—quo audito celestia, terrestria 
et infernalia tremunt et colunt. (6) Et per hec sanctissima nomina: On, 
Alpha et Ω, principium et finis, El, Ely, Eloe, Eloy, Elion, Sother, Emanuel, 
Sabaoth, Adonay, Egge, Ya, Ya, Ye, Ye, (7) benedicatur hec cruoris creatura 
et preparetur et aptetur pro hincausto sacri sigilli tui et sanctissimi nomi-
nis “Semenphoras” tui, quod est benedictum per infinita secula seculorum. 
Amen’.
() O
‘Domine Iesu Christe, per ineffabilem misericordiam tuam parce michi et 
miserere mei et exaudi me nunc per invocacionem nominis trinitatis, Patris 
et Filii et Spiritus sancti, (9) ut acceptas habeas, et tibi placeant, oraciones 
et verba oris mei, per invocacionem tuorum sanctorum 100 nominum, 
86 i.e. encausti.


--- PAGE 288 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
287
CXXXVII. Second Chapter of the Fifth Treatise, concerning 
the consecration of the ink287 used for the Seal  
of the Eternal, Living, and True God.288
“O invisible God, O inestimable God, O ineffable God, O unchangeable 
God, (2) O incorruptible God, O pious God, O sweetest God, O exalted 
God, O glorious God, O immeasurable God, O God of all mercy, I, although 
unworthy—or, full of iniquity, deceit, and wickedness—(3) I come seeking 
your mercy, beseeching and entreating, that you not look back on all my 
countless faults, but even as you are accustomed to have mercy on sinners, 
and hear the prayers of the humble, (4) so too deign to hear me, your servant 
N., although unworthy, beseeching you for the blessing of this creature of 
blood, that it may be made suitable and worthy for the ink of your sacred and 
precious seal, and precious and of your name “Shem Ha-Meforash,” (5) that 
it may possess the properties it must maintain, through your most holy name, 
which is written with four letters, IOHT, HE, VAU, DALETH289—Agla, 
Eloy, Yaym, Theos, God—which heard, all that inhabit Heaven, Earth, and 
Hell do tremble. (6) And through these most holy names: On, Alpha and 
Omega, the Beginning and the End, El, Ely, Eloe, Eloy, Elion, Sother, Eman-
uel, Sabaoth, Adonay, Egge, Ya, Ya, Ye, Ye, (7) may this creature of blood be 
blessed and may it be prepared and may it be suitable for ink for your sacred 
seal and your most holy name “Shem Ha-Meforash,” which is blessed forever 
and ever Amen.”
(8) Prayer.290
“O Lord Jesus Christ,291 through your ineffable mercy spare me and pity me, 
and hear me now, through the invocation of the name of the Trinity, of the 
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, (9) in order that the prayers and 
words from my mouth are acceptable and pleasing to you, through the invo-
287 Lat. Hincausti, i.e. encausti: ink; traditionally a purple-red ink.
288 In R, CXXXVII.20-22, 1-19 are found before VII.
289 This unusual variation of the Tetragrammaton is also found in CXXXIII.38. See 
introduction.
290 Compare Young 2015, p. 13
291 Compare R 27v.


--- PAGE 289 ---
sworn book of honorius
288
scilicet Agla, Monhon’ et cetera ‘humiliter et fideliter deprecans, (10) licet 
ego indignus, tamen in te confidens, ut sanctifices et benedicas cruorem 
istum per sanctissima nomina tua predicta et per nomen “Semenpho-
ras” 72 literarum, (11) quatinus per virtutem et sanctitatem et potestatem 
eorundem nominum et per virtutem et potestatem tuam divinam sit cruor 
iste consecratus ✠, benedictus ✠, confirmatus ✠ per virtutem sacratis-
simi corporis et sanguinis tui, (12) ut virtutem, quam optinere debet, et 
aptitudinem optineat et efficaciter sine aliqua fallacia veraciter valeat ad 
scribendum sigillum tuum sanctum, (13) ut sanctam virtutem optineat et 
potestatem habeat, ad quam est institutum, prestante Domino, qui sedet in 
altissimis, cui sit laus, honor et gloria per infinita secula seculorum. Amen’.
(14) Oracio benediccionis 
‘Benedicat te Pater ✠, benedicat te Filius ✠, benedicat te Spiritus sanctus ✠. 
(15) Sancta mater Domini nostri Iesu Christi te benedicat et sanctificet, ut 
virtutem sacramenti in sigillo Dei ex te scribendo, o cruor, optineas, quam 
optinere debes. (16) Benedicant te omnes sancte virgines, benedicant 
te hodie et in omni tempore omnes sancti et electi Dei. Omnes virtutes 
celestes te benedicant et confirment. (17) Angeli omnes et archangeli, vir-
tutes, principatus, potestates, troni, dominaciones, cherubyn et seraphin 
ex auctoritate et licencia Dei te benedicant. (18) Per merita et oraciones 
omnium sanctorum tuorum, Domine Iesu Christe, benedicas ✠ et sancti-
fices ✠ et consecres ✠ cruorem istum sigilli Dei et confirmes per omnipo-
tenciam tuam, (19) et virtutem et potestatem optineat sigillum tuum de 
eo scribendum, quam debet, et ad quam est institutum et confirmatum, 
prestante Domino nostro Iesu Christo, cuius regnum et imperium sine fine 
manet in secula seculorum. Amen’.
(20) Antequam iste 3 oraciones supra cruorem dicantur procedenter 
versus Ierusalem, dicatur supra eum exorcismus salis, quod ponitur in 
aqua, ter, nisi quod nomina sic debent mutari: (21) “Exorcizo te, creatura 
cruoris” loco de ‘... creatura salis’ et ‘qui per Salomonem te in sigillum Dei 
mitti iussit’ loco de ‘qui per Heliseum te in aqua mitti iussit’ et sic de aliis. 


--- PAGE 290 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
289
cation of your one hundred holy names, namely Agla, Monhon”and so on,292 
“humbly and faithfully begging you, (10) I although unworthy, yet trusting in 
you, that you would sanctify and bless this blood by your most sacred names 
aforesaid, and by the name “Shem Ha-Meforash” of seventy-two letters, (11) 
that by the virtue, sanctity, and power of the same names, and by your divine 
virtue and power, this same blood may be consecrated ✠ blessed ✠ strength-
ened ✠ through the virtue of your most holy body and blood, (12) that it may 
obtain the virtue and ability which it must possess, and effectually without 
any deceit, for correctly writing your sacred seal, (13) in order that it maintains 
the sacred virtue and have the power, for which it has been prepared, with the 
Lord providing, who sits in the highest place, to whom be praise, honor and 
glory forever and ever. Amen.”
(14) Prayer of benediction
“May the Father bless you ✠; may the Son bless you ✠; may the Holy Spirit 
bless you. ✠ (15) May the holy mother of our Lord Jesus Christ bless and sanc-
tify you, O blood, that you may have the sacramental power for writing the 
Seal of God, that you may possess the properties you must maintain. (16) May 
all the holy virgins bless you; may all the saints and elect of God bless you and 
strengthen you today and for all times. (17) May all Angels and Archangels, 
Virtues, Principalities, Powers, Thrones, Dominations, Cherubim, and Sera-
phim bless you, by the authority and permission of God. (18) Through the 
merits and prayers of all your saints, O Lord Jesus Christ, may you bless ✠ 
and sanctify ✠ and consecrate ✠ this blood for this Seal of God, and may you 
strengthen it through your omnipotence, (19) and that through its writing, 
your seal may maintain the virtue and power which it should have, and for 
which it has been instituted and confirmed, with our Lord Jesus Christ pro-
viding, who lives and reigns forever, world without end. Amen.”
(20) Before that, three prayers should be said over the blood, while facing 
towards Jerusalem: The exorcism of the salt should be said over it three times, 
which is placed in the water, except the words should be changed thus: (21) 
Say “I exorcise you, O creature of blood” instead of “I exorcise you O creature 
of salt” and say “which God, through Solomon, commanded to be put into 
the seal of God” in place of “which God, through Elisha, commanded be put 
292 CI.2


--- PAGE 291 ---
sworn book of honorius
290
(22) Illo autem exorcismo sic ter dicto cum stola in collo dic ter oraciones 
tres precedentes. Quo facto sigilli Domini cruor erit benedictus. 
CXXXVIII Tercium capitulum quinti tractatus de  
exposicione precepti missarum dati in primo tractatu et 
subintellecti in quolibet tractatuum premissorum
(2) Prima dies 
In prima die secunde mundacionis dicet sacerdos missam alicuius diei 
Dominice extra ieiunium vel alicuius secundum maiorem effectum, quem 
habet ad illam. (3) In loco prefacionis dicat hanc oracionem: ‘ ... nos tibi 
semper et ubique gracias agere, Domine, sancte Pater, omnipotens eterne 
Deus, per Christum Dominum nostrum, (4) per quem maiestatem tuam 
laudant angeli, adorant dominaciones, tremunt potestates, celi celorumque 
virtutes ac beata seraphin socia exultacione concelebrant, cum quibus et 
nostras voces’ et cetera.87
(5) Secunda dies 
In secunda die hanc loco prefacionis cum missa apostolorum: ‘... 
Te, Domine,88 suppliciter exorare, ut gregem tuum, pastor eterne, non 
desera<n>s set per beatos apostolos tuos’ et cetera. 
(6) 3a dies 
In 3a die missam ieiunii vel quadragesime et hanc oracionem: “... nos 
tibi semper et ubique gracias agere, Domine, sancte Pater, omnipotens 
eterne Deus, qui corporali ieiunio vicia’ et cetera.89
() 4a dies 
87 The preface starts “Vere dignum et iustum est, aequum et salutare, nos tibi ...” and 
concludes as follows: “... et nostras voces, ut admitti iubeas deprecamur, supplici 
confessione dicentes:.”
88 “Vere dignum et iustum est, aequum et salutare te Domine....”
89 “... vitia comprimis, mentem elevas, virtutem largiris et praemia: per Christum 
Dominum nostrum. Per quem maiestatem tuam laudant Angeli, adorant Dominationes, 
tremunt Potestates. Coeli, coelorumque Virtutes, ac beata Seraphim, socia exsultatione 
concelebrant. Cum quibus et nostras voces, ut admitti iubeas deprecamur, supplici 
confessione dicentes: “


--- PAGE 292 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
291
into the water” and similarly for the rest, (22) Then having said this exorcism 
three times, with the stole around your neck, then say the other three prayers 
preceding, likewise three times. When this has been done, the consecration of 
the blood for the Seal of the Lord will be complete.
CXXXVIII. The third chapter of the Fifth Treatise, concerning 
the exposition of teachings of the Masses given in the first 
treatise, and a little more explanation of the treatises set before.
(2) The first day
On the first day of the second purification the priest should say Mass 
of any Sunday outside of fasting or othewise for the greater effect which it 
has towards that. (3) In place of the preface, he should say this prayer: “[It 
is truly right and just, and for our salvation] that we should give thanks to 
you, always and everywhere, O Lord, O holy Father, almighty eternal God, 
through Christ our Lord, (4) through whom the Angels praise your great-
ness, the Dominations adore it, the Powers tremble in awe, the heavens and 
the heavenly Virtues and the blessed Seraphim share in triumphant chorus to 
celebrate it. Together with these … our voices also” and so forth.293
(5) The second day
On the second day, say this in place of the preface, along with a mass of 
the Apostles: “[It is truly right and just, and for our salvation] O Lord, to 
humbly beseech you, that  you not abandon your flock, O eternal shepherd, 
but through your blessed Apostles” and so on.294
(6) The third day
On the third day, say a mass of fasting, or the fortieth, and this prayer: 
“[It is truly right and just, and for our salvation] that we should give thanks 
to you, always and everywhere, O Lord, O holy Father, almighty eternal God, 
who by this bodily fasting curbs our vices” etc.295
(7) The fourth day
293 “... together with these we beg you, that you may bid our voices also to be admitted 
while we say with humble praise.” GH p. 35: In ch cxxxviii additional information is given 
about the saying of masses during the second purification: We are told which mass should 
be said and what its preface should be on each day ...
294 This seems to be simply the traditional Preface of the Apostles. I see no alteration.
295 “... lifts up our minds and bestows on us strength and rewards; through Christ our 
Lord. Through whom the Angels praise your greatness” etc. as above.


