SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii ŌĆö the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 12/28  |  CHARS: 262125-285805 of 659348
============================================================

’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Lamyhara, omnipotens, misericors Pater, omnium creaturarum ordinator, 
[iuste] iudex, eterne rex regum et Domine dominancium, qui tuis sanc-
tis sapienciam, sanctitatem et gloriam conferre dignatus es, (’£▓) concede 
michi, ut possim te videre mirabiliter, qui omnia diiudicas et discernis. (’£│) 
Illumina hodie cor meum fulgore claritatis et mundicie atque sancti’¼ücen-
cie, ut cognoscam et intelligam et facialiter videam te et tuam gloriam. Et 
quod huius gloriam videre merear, exopto. Amen. 


--- PAGE 138 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
137
that the power and effectiveness of this sacramental and mystical work may 
manifest in me through you and your holy angels, the vision and contempla-
tion of you may be illuminated with effectiveness (3) and, by the names of 
the same holy angels, may it abound in my memory and mind, and your holy 
works of the vision of your presence may be illuminated in me in an enduring 
way. Amen.
LVII. Prayer 5.84
Hocleiste, O holy God, blessed Father and imperishable evidence of the 
heart, who has determined to establish Heaven and Earth, the sea, and the 
abysses and everything that is in them, (2) in whose sight subsists the plans, 
words, deeds, and piety of all, by these precious sacraments of your angels 
grant unto me those things which I desire and I believe, the glory and grace of 
this vision, without any ill intent. Amen.
LVIII. Prayer 6.85
Hamphynethon, Heloy, most merciful creator, inspirer and reformer of all 
corrupted souls and approver and arranger of all good wills, (2) look merci-
fully in your glory on my earnest prayer and kindly consider my intent, that 
what I ask for with humility, you might grant to me from the abundance of 
your greatness, as you have promised. Amen.
LIX. Prayer 7.86
Lamyhara, almighty, merciful Father, the ordainer of the all creatures, [just] 
judge, eternal king of kings and Lord of Lords, who has deigned to grant to 
your saints wisdom, sanctity, and glory, (2) grant to me that I may miracu-
lously be able to behold you, who sees and decides all things. (3) Illuminate 
my heart this day with the brightness of your splendor and purity and sanc-
tity, that I may be able to comprehend and understand and see your face and 
your glory. And that I may be worthy to see this glory, I long for.87 Amen.
84 Ars. Not. 135, JV p. 90.
85 Ars. Not. 137, JV p. 91.
86 Ars. Not. 138, JV p. 92.
87 Note the adaptation of the Ars Notoria material is a bit awkward at times.


--- PAGE 139 ---
sworn book of honorius
138
LX ’£Ė’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Hanazay. zarahoron. hubisenaar. ghu. hirbaionay. gynbar. zanailc. selchora. 
zelmora. hiramay. iethohal. ylaramel. hamatha. mathois. iaboha. (2) gethos. 
cozomerag. zosomeraht. hamy. phodel. denos. gerot. hagalos. meliha. 
tagahel. sechamy. salihelethon. monocogristes. lememon. hachagnon. 
hamyhon. 
LXI O’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» ’Øż’Øź ’Ø░’Ø▓’Øź’ØŻ’Øź’Øż’Øź’Ø«’Ø┤’Ø® L’ØĪ’Ø┤’Ø®’Ø«’ØĪ
Ianemyer, unus, magnus, mirabilis, eterne Deus, eterni consilii angelus, 
dispositor omnium virtutum et compositor atque ordinator, (2) adorna 
hodie intelligenciam meam et multiplica in me racionem penitendi et cla-
rificandi et cognicionem ac claritatem, quam in proferendis nominibus 
celestium angelorum tuis creaturis contulisti, (3) et eandem scienciam et 
puritatem secundum promissionem tuam michi concede et da michi huius 
visionis tue efficaciam et discrecionem. Amen. 
LXII O’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Hadyon, usyon, omnium potestatum atque regnorum et iudiciorum eterna 
conspiracione conspicuus, omnium administrans +thema+6 glorie et tue 
visionis, (2) in cuius regimine nullum impedimentum dabis, instaura, 
queso, habitam innocenciam et repetitam et adhuc maiorem, cor meum, 
voluntatem meam, linguam meam, opus meum (3) ad mei animam mundi-
ficandam, absolvendam et tui faciem facialiter videndam et ad habendum 
que in hac arte necessaria auctoritas divina commendat, ut in me perfecte 
compleantur. Amen.
LXIII O’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» H’Øź’Øó’Ø▓’ØĪ’Ø®’ØŻ’ØĪ 
{H}ely. azelethias. uelozeosmohan. zama. saruelo. hatehus. saguaht. 
Adonay. zoma. lenozothos. lithon. iezemothon. sadahot. et tu, Deus, 
6 The ++ is used by GH to indicate turbata, i.e. disturbed/corrupted. Ars Notoria reads 
zeuma. i.e. zeugma (ŌĆ£bond, yokingŌĆØ). C: zema; ed in Agrippa reads schemata i.e. ŌĆ£outline, 
shapesŌĆØ.


--- PAGE 140 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
139
LX. Prayer 8.88
Hanazay. zarahoron. hubisenaar. ghu. hirbaionay. gynbar. zanailc. selchora. 
zelmora. hiramay. iethohal. ylaramel. hamatha. mathois. iaboha. (2) gethos. 
cozomerag. zosomeraht. hamy. phodel. denos. gerot. hagalos. meliha. tagahel. 
sechamy. salihelethon. monocogristes. lememon. hachagnon. hamyhon.
LXI. The meaning of the preceding Prayer.89
Ianemyer, One, great, wonderful, and eternal God, angel of eternal council, 
disposer of all virtues and composer and ordainer, (2) adorn my intelligence 
this day, and multiply in me a penitent and clarifying reasoning, and under-
standing and clarity which you have conferred on creatures for pronouncing 
the names of your heavenly angels, (3) and grant to me the same knowledge 
and purity according to your promise, and give me the effectiveness and dis-
cernment of this vision of you. Amen.
LXII. Prayer.90
Hadyon,91 usyon, illustrious with eternal harmony of all powers, rul-
ers, and courts, administering +the theme+ of all glory, and of the vision of 
yourself, (2) in the control of which you make no obstacles; renew, I beg you 
the well-kept and repeated innocence, and even more so, my heart, my will, 
my tongue, my work (3) for the purification and absolution of my soul, and 
for seeing you in person, and for having those things which divine authority 
commends are necessary for this art, in order that they are fulfilled in me fully. 
Amen.
LXIII. Hebrew Prayer.92
{H}ely. azelethias. uelozeosmohan. zama. saruelo. hatehus. saguaht. Adonay. 
zoma. lenozothos. lithon. iezemothon. Sadahot, and you, O God, be favor-
88 Ars. Not. Glose de la version B, ┬¦ 140, V p. 197.
89 Ars. Not. 139, JV p. 92.
90 Ars. Not. 141, JV pp. 92ŌĆō3.
91 This name is not found in Chapters C and CI, which give the next name as ŌĆ£Sadyon.ŌĆØ 
but that is used in LXIV below.
92 Ars. Not. 141 glose de la version B, var. 7, JV pp. 197ŌĆō198.


--- PAGE 141 ---
sworn book of honorius
140
propicius in me promissiones confirma, sicut confirmasti per eosdem ser-
mones regi Salomoni et preter eosdem Iohanni et Paulo. (2) Emitte michi, 
Domine, virtutem de celis, que cor meum et mentem meam illuminet et 
confirmet, et conforta, Deus, intellectum meum et animam meam. (3) 
Innova me et lava me aquis, que super celos sunt, et effunde de Spiritu 
tuo super carnem meam et in visceribus meis ad facienda et componenda 
iudicia tua humilitate et caritate, qua celum et terram fecisti et hominem 
ad ymaginem et similitudinem tua m creasti et formasti. (4) Infunde clari-
tatis tue lumen intellectui meo, ut fundatus et radicatus in misericordia tua 
diligam nomen tuum, cognoscam et videam et adorem te et optineam et 
intelligam omnes vias huius artis habendi visionem tuam, (5) ob quam hec 
data a Deo et insignita et emissa per manus sanctorum angelorum sunt 
figurarum et sanctitatum misteria, que omnia in corde meo et intellectu 
mentis mee habeam et cognoscam, et huius artis vere et efficaciter effec-
tum habeam nominis sancti tui et gloriosi prevalente consilio. Amen.
LXIV ’£╣’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Sadyon, scio enim, quia delector in factura tua magna, mirabili et inef-
fabili, [et] dabis michi visionem, quam per hoc opus habentibus pollicitus 
es secundum magnam et incomprehensibilem veritatem tuam, (2) Theon. 
hatagamagon. haramalon. zamoyma. thamasal. ieconomaril. harionathor. 
iecomagol. gelamagos. remelihot. remanathar. hariomagalathar. hanan-
ehos. uelouianathar. haiozoroy. iebasaly. (3) Per hec sacratissima Dei et 
gloriosissima et profunda misteria et preciosissimam mundiciam virtutem 
et visionis tue graciam auge in me et comple quod incepisti et reforma 
quod ostendisti in me. (4) zemabar. henoranaht. grenetail. samzatham. 
iecornazay. fundamentum altissime omnium bonitatum et scienciarum 
atque virtutum, (5) tribue famulo tuo tibi displicencia vitare contagia et 
lavare, et tua veritate pura et intencione sancta possim saciari, (6) ut tuam 


--- PAGE 142 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
141
ably inclined to confirm in me the promises, as you confirmed them by the 
same words to King Solomon, and moreover by the same to John and Paul. 
(2) Send out to me, O Lord, the power from Heaven, which will illuminate 
and strengthen my heart and my mind, and strengthen, O God, my under-
standing and my soul. (3) Renew me and wash me with the waters which are 
above the heavens, and pour out from your spirit over my flesh and into my 
vital organs, for accomplishing and arranging your judgments with humil-
ity and affection, with which you have made Heaven and Earth, and created 
people after your own image and likeness. (4) Pour the light of your bright-
ness into my understanding, that being grounded and rooted in your mercy I 
may love your name, recognize and see and honor you, and that I may obtain 
and understand all the ways of this art of having the vision of you, (5) for 
the sake of which these are given by God and made known, and are sent out 
from the hands of the holy angels the mysteries of the figures93 and holiness, 
all which may I receive and in my heart the understanding of my mind, and 
comprehend, and may I attain the true and efficacious accomplishment of 
this art, with the prevailing counsel of your sacred and glorious name. Amen.
LXIV. Prayer 9.
Sadyon,94 I know indeed, that I delight in your great handiwork, wonder-
ful and indescribable, [and] the vision that you will give to me, which you 
have promised those doing this work, according to your great and incom-
prehensible truth, (2) Theon. hatagamagon. haramalon. zamoyma. thama-
sal. ieconomaril. harionathor. iecomagol. gelamagos. remelihot. remanathar. 
hariomagalathar. hananehos. uelouianathar. haiozoroy. iebasaly. (3) Through 
these most sacred and most glorious and profound mysteries of God and by 
the most precious purity, power, and grace of your vision, increase in me and 
fulfill that which you have begun, and restore that which you have revealed 
in me. (4) zemabar. henoranaht. grenetail. samzatham. iecornazay The high-
est foundation of all goodnesses, knowledge, and virtues, (5) enable your ser-
vant to avoid contagions displeasing to yourself, and to be washed clean, and 
filled with your pure truth and holy striving, (6) just as your promise, longing 
with all my heart and possessing virtue and purity in all things, as well as the 
93 In Ars Notoria this refers no doubt to the notae or mystical drawings which are the 
centerpiece of that art.
94 Seems to repeat names 9 and 10. See Ars. Not. Glose de la version B, Var. 8, JV p. 198.


--- PAGE 143 ---
sworn book of honorius
142
promissionem toto corde desiderans et possidens in omnibus tam virtuti-
bus quam puritatibus et viciorum absolucionibus precipue per hec sancta 
misteria videar et cognoscar adipisci et bene in ista arte per’¼üciar penitus,7 
laudabilis ac pro sancta visione mundus. 
LXV ’£▒’£░’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Hely, reverende, potens et dominans superioribus angelis et archangelis 
omnibusque celestibus creaturis [et] tam infernalibus quam terrestribus, 
de cuius magni’¼ücencia plenitudinis venit, (’£▓) ut tibi a nobis digne famule-
tur, cuius a mundi ’£┤ partibus regnat potestas, qui [ex carne], ossibus, anima 
et spiritu hominem ad ymaginem et similitudinem tuam formasti, (’£│) da 
michi huius artis scienciam et visionis e’¼Ćectum coroborans me in ipsius 
facultate visionis sancte et sciencie. Amen. 
LXVI XI’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Horlon, Deus, qui omnia numero, pondere et mensura fecisti, de cuius 
munere omne capud hominis desiderans elevabitur, in cuius ordine 
omnium momentorum sive dierum patens est et aperta dimencio, (’£▓) qui 
eciam solus stellarum nomina numeras et nominas, menti mee constantem 
tribue visionis tue e’¼ācaciam, ut in huius artis cognicione et operacione te 
diligam et videam et tue pietatis munus agnoscam facialis visionis. Amen. 
LXVII ’£▒’£▓’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Porrenthimon, mediator omnium operacionum et creaturarum, a 
quo omnia exeunt naturaliter bona et omnium [virtutum] dona, a quo 
omne, quod est solidum et perfectum, (’£▓) cuius omnis sermo recens 
est et de regalibus sedibus venit gracia in corda nostra, dum medium 
tenerent omnia silencium media, (’£│) racione et mente me tua caritate 
’£Ę GH reads peritus (expert), but I think this is a simple typo. Sl. ’£│’£Ė’£Ą’£┤ ’£▒’£▓’£│r, R ’£Ą’£░r, and Ars. 
Not: all read penitus.


--- PAGE 144 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
143
forgiveness of faults, especially for seeing these sacred mysteries, and gaining 
comprehension, and that I may be made thoroughly complete in this art of 
yours, praiseworthy, and pure for the sacred vision.
LXV. Prayer 10.95
Hely, O One most worthy to be revered, mighty, master of angels and arch-
angels, and all celestial creatures, both infernal and earthly, whose vast abun-
dance enables us (2) to serve you worthily, whose power rules from the four 
parts of the world, who made mankind after your own image and likeness, out 
of [flesh,] bones, soul, and spirit, (3) grant to me the knowledge of this art, 
and the effect of the vision, strengthening me its ability of the sacred vision 
and knowledge. Amen.
LXVI. Prayer 11.96
Horlon, God, who ordered all things in number, weight, and measure,97 
from whose gift the longing head of every person will be lifted up, who has 
arranged all moments or days are well known, and dimensions measured, (2) 
you who alone number the stars and name them,98 grant to my mind the con-
stant effectiveness of the vision of yourself, in order that in learning and prac-
tice of this art I may see and love you, and acknowledge the gift of your piety 
of the vision of your face. Amen.
LXVII. Prayer 12.99
Porrenthimon, O mediator of all operations and creatures, from whom natu-
rally emerges all good things and the gifts of all [virtues], which is unbroken 
and perfect, (2) whose every word is fresh, and comes from the royal throne, 
and by grace comes into our hearts, while all things were in quiet silence,100 (3) 
by reason of your love and my mind, that my understanding may be sufficient 
95 Compare Ars Notoria, 142 [version A]ŌĆö glose, JV p. 199.
96 This prayer is the only one that is never mentioned in the descriptions of the rituals. 
See GH, p. 49. Compare Ars. Not. 144 [version A]ŌĆöglose, JV p. 199.
97 Wis. 11:21.
98 Ps. 146:4. KJV 147:4.
99 Ars. Not. 145, JV p. 94.
100 Compare Wis. 18:14-15.


--- PAGE 145 ---
sworn book of honorius
144
[in] intellectum bonum construe ad per’¼üciendum hec tanta tam[que] 
excellentissima misteria,8 huius artis, sancte tue visionis et istorum sacra-
mentorum perfectum consequar e’¼Ćectum. Amen. 
LXVIII ’£▒’£│’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø»
[Ihelur], iudex omnipotens, Pater, qui notum nobis fecisti salutare tuum et 
in conspectu gencium revelasti iusticiam tuam, revela oculos meos et cor 
meum illustra salutari iusticia tua, ut mirabilia de tuis tam gloriosissimis 
videam [sacramentis], (’£▓) quatinus per ea tantam in hac arte consequar 
innocenciam et intelligencie clari’¼ücenciam, ut te prestante, qui solus mira-
bilia facis magna, in ipsa opera subitus celebs e’¼āciar, (’£│) ut mea celebitate 
et innocencia cum puritate et caritate recepta te speculando speculer et te 
videndo videam et tuam sanctam visionem videam et intercessione virtu-
tum celestium honorem te in secula seculorum. Amen. 
LXIX ’£▒’£┤’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Gofgameli, omnis sapiencie Deus et sciencie donator illis, in quibus pec-
catum non est, omnis discipline spiritualis magister et doni spiritualis 
cuiusque largitor, macule omnis elimator, (’£▓) te, Domine, per angelos et 
archangelos tuos, per tronos et [dominaciones], potestates, principatus 
et virtutes, per cherubin et seraphin, per ’£▓’£┤ seniores, per omnem mili-
ciam celestis excercitus (’£│) adoro, invoco, ’¼éagito, vereor, glori’¼üco et exalto 
nomen tuum sanctissimum, terribile et mitissimum et te queso, Domine, 
ut hodie cor meum Spiritus sancti lumine et gracia tue visitacionis fecun-
datum, clari’¼ücatum et caritate coroboratum illustres, tu, qui es trinus et 
unus. Amen. 
LXX ’£▒’£Ą’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Emanuel, adoro te, rex regum et Deus meus et substancia mea, salus et 
revelacio mea, memoria et virtus mea, qui hora una diversarum genera lin- 
’£Ė GH adds ŌĆ£<ut>.ŌĆØ


--- PAGE 146 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
145
for attaining such great and excellent mysteries of this art, of the sacred vision 
of you, and of those sacraments of yours I might achieve the perfect comple-
tion. Amen.
LXVIII. Prayer 13.101
[Ihelur],102 almighty judge, O Father, who has shown to us your salvation, and 
revealed your justice in the sight of the nations, open my eyes and illuminate 
my heart with your saving justice, in order that I may see the miracles from 
your glorious [sacraments], (2) as far as through those I may obtain such great 
innocence and clarity of understanding in this art, so that with your gracious-
ness, who alone performs great miracles, I may suddenly be made celibate in 
this work, (3) that through my celibacy and innocence, with purity and char-
ity received, that by looking for you, I may look at you, and by striving to see 
you, I may see you, and I may see your holy vision, and with the intervention 
of heavenly powers I may honor you forever and ever. Amen.
LXIX. Prayer 14.103
Gofgameli, God of all wisdom and giver of this science to those without 
sin, master of all spiritual teachings, and bountiful giver of all spiritual gifts, 
cleanser of all stains, (2) to you, O Lord, through your Angels and Archangels, 
Thrones and [Dominations], Potestates, Principalities and Virtues, through 
the Cherubim and Seraphim, through the twenty-four Elders, by all the host 
of the celestial army, (3) I honor, invoke, entreat, revere, glorify, and exalt your 
most holy name, terrifying yet most gentle, I beg you, O Lord, that today my 
heart may be made fruitful with the light of the Holy Spirit, and the grace of 
your visitation, and made clear and bright with your love, you who are three-
fold and one. Amen.
LXX. Prayer 15.104
Emanuel, I honor you, the king of kings, and my God, and my substance, 
my salvation and my revelation, my memory and my strength, who in a sin-
101 Ars. Not. 143, JV p. 93.
102 Name 13 seems to have been omitted by mistake.
103 Ars. Not. 146, JV p. 94.
104 Compare Ars. Not. 146 [version A] Var. 9, JV p. 200.


--- PAGE 147 ---
sworn book of honorius
146
guarum edi’¼ücantibus turrim dedisti (’£▓) et qui sanctis apostolis tuis unccio-
nem septiformis Spiritus sancti infudisti et illis ediomata, qui nos docerent 
de omnibus linguis eisdem repente loqui, tribuisti per virtutem verbi tui, in 
quo omnia creasti, (’£│) per potenciam huius sacramenti inspira cor meum 
et infunde in illud rorem gracie tue, ut subito tui Spiritus sancti a’¼äatus 
lumine e’¼ācaciam huius operacionis, (’£┤) innocenciam et puri’¼ücacionem 
anime et harum sanctarum visionum capax voluntatem subtilem et inge-
niosam et mentem clari’¼ücatam valeam consequi. Amen. 
LXXI ’£▒’£Č’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
{H}on. ezethomos. iezemonos. hazalathon. azaithon. hentynethel. hezem-
tynethel. zamayzathon. hamanzathon. zamarzathon. (’£▓) hezemeguor. zec-
romanda. iecomancha. ieraphay. zaraphamy. phalezethon. phaboghecon. 
seremyhal. sacramyzan. (’£│) iethemathon. sacramazaym. se{cr}anal. sacra-
mathan. iezemy. halathon. hathezihacos. ieceley. mathan. ateriathos. zai. 
mazay. (’£┤) zamma. zazay. guygucheibib. gigithios. guahiros. megalon. sen-
egalon. heracruhit. ciarihuht. haracrihuz. [Amen].
LXXII O’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» L’ØĪ’Ø┤’Ø®’Ø«’ØĪ
Domine, Deus incomprehensibilis, invisibilis, immortalis et intelligibilis, 
cuius vultum angeli et archangeli et celestes virtutes ardenter videre desid-
erant, (’£▓) cuius maiestatem eternaliter desidero adorare atque continue pro 
posse meo exerceo adorans te Deum vivum in secula seculorum. Amen. 
LXXIII ’£▒’£Ę’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» 
Admyhel, Domine, Deus, sancte Pater omnipotens, exaudi preces meas 
hodie et inclina aurem tuam ad oraciones meas, (’£▓) chemon. gezomelyhon. 


--- PAGE 148 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
147
gle hour gave diverse languages to the builders of the tower,105 (2) and who 
infused into your holy apostles with the seven-fold anointing of the Holy 
Spirit and with speaking in tongues, you granted that they might teach us to 
suddenly speak in all the same languages, by the power of your Word, through 
which you created all things. (3) By the power of this sacrament, inspire my 
heart and pour into it the dew of your grace, that suddenly inspired with the 
light of your Holy Spirit, I may have the strength, the effectiveness of this 
operation, (4) the innocence, and the purification of the soul, and fit for these 
holy visions, and able to achieve a subtle and clever will, and a clarified mind. 
Amen.
LXXI. Prayer 16.106
{H}on. ezethomos. iezemonos. hazalathon. azaithon. hentynethel. hezem-
tynethel. zamayzathon. hamanzathon. zamarzathon. (2) hezemeguor. zecro-
manda. iecomancha. ieraphay. zaraphamy. phalezethon. phaboghecon. ser-
emyhal. sacramyzan. (3) iethemathon. sacramazaym. se{cr}anal. sacramathan. 
iezemy. halathon. hathezihacos. ieceley. mathan. ateriathos. zai. mazay. (4) 
zamma. zazay. guygucheibib. gigithios. guahiros. megalon. senegalon. hera-
cruhit. ciarihuht. haracrihuz. [Amen]. 
LXXII. Latin Prayer.107
O Lord God, incomprehensible, invisible, immortal, and intelligible, whose 
face the angels and archangels, and heavenly powers passionately desire to see, 
(2) whose majesty I desire to honor forever and continuously, enforcing it 
to the extent of my powers, honoring you, the living God, forever and ever. 
Amen.
LXXIII. Prayer 17.108
Admyhel, O Lord, God, holy and almighty Father, hear my prayers today, 
and bend your ear towards my prayers, (2) chemon. gezomelyhon. samaht. 
105 I.e. the Tower of Babel. Gen. 11:4ŌĆō9.
106 Ars. Not. 90, JV p. 205.
107 Ars. Not. 91, JV p. 67.
108 Ars. Not. 92, JV p. 205


--- PAGE 149 ---
sworn book of honorius
148
samaht. gezagam. iezehator. lesehator. sezehacon. saymanda. samay. gezi-
hel. gulahentihel. iezel. iezetihel. galetihel. gazay. hetihel. 
LXXIV O’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» L’ØĪ’Ø┤’Ø®’Ø«’ØĪ 
Deus, semper via, vita, veritas, da lucem tuam ’¼éorere per virtutem sancti 
Spiritus in conscienciam meam et mentem meam et concede, (’£▓) ut fulgeat 
et clarescat donum operacionis tue et donum gracie tue in cor meum et 
animam meam nunc et per omnia secula seculorum. Amen. 
LXXV ’£▒’£Ė’ØĪ ’Ø»’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø»
Honzmorb. lemogethon. hegemothon. hazathay. hazathar. hazamathar. 
hazatha. hazamathar. iazamathan. zegomothay. gohathay. zachana. lego-
mothay. iachama. legomezon. legornezon. lemdomethon. hathanathios. 
(’£▓) lamdomathon. iegomaday. hathamam. zachamos. hathanayos. helless-
cymon. zelezion. uaderabar. uagedaroin. lauinauaht. lamandi. gemechor. 
guomon. gehor. genamchor. hellemay. iezecromay. iecromal. iecrahaly. 
tholomanos. colomaithos. 
LXXVI O’Ø▓’ØĪ’ØŻ’Ø®’Ø» L’ØĪ’Ø┤’Ø®’Ø«’ØĪ
Vita hominum et omnium creaturarum visibilium et invisibilium, claritas 
eterna celestium spirituum, omnium hominum salus inde’¼üciensque pieta-
tis origo, (’£▓) qui omnia novisti, antequam ’¼üant, qui iudicas omnia, que 
videntur [et non sunt et que non videntur] et sunt, [et] ine’¼Ćabili disposi-
cione discernis, glori’¼üca sanctum nomen tuum et ine’¼Ćabile hodie. (’£│) Cor-
robora cor meum et intellectum meum et animam meam et auge innocen-
ciam meam et con’¼ürma precem meam et a viciis expeditam redde animam 
meam, clari’¼ücatam in virtutibus et penitenciis et ’¼éetibus et innocenciis, 
(’£┤) ut facultate puritatis et innocencie a te michi collata et lima penitencie 
et tue gracie laudem te et cognoscam te sine enigmate et videam facialiter 
te et glori’¼ücem nomen tuum ad laudem tuam in secula seculorum. Amen. 


