SOURCE: Liber Juratus Honorii — the Sworn Book of Honorius (Peterson ed.)
CHUNK: 19/28  |  CHARS: 429396-454154 of 659348
============================================================

8, 
99. (37) Obey therefore Zebedei226 and me in his name. I invoke you, heav-
enly powers, and conjure you with the invocation, through Ab, through Gap, 
through Abx, through Abra, through Abraca, through Gebra, through Abr-
223 SSM: nomyx.
224 SSM: pele. On PELE, see Agrippa, OP3.11. Also used by John Dee. See Peterson, 
John Dee’s Five Books of Mystery (York Beach ME: Weiser, 2003, pp. 79-80, 152.) 
225 Compare CXIV.
226 Is this an indication that the biblical quote has been misunderstood?


--- PAGE 221 ---
sworn book of honorius
220
Abx, per Abra, per Abraca, per Gebra, per Abracala, per Abracasap, per 
Abracaleus, per Zargon, per Abrion, per Eleyon, per Sargion.
() Vos igitur, potentes angeli, invoco et invocando coniuro. Superne 
maiestatis imperii potentes potenter imparo per eum, qui dixit, et factum 
est, cui omnes excercitus angelorum celestium, terrestrium et infernorum 
subduntur et obediunt, () et per nomen eius ineﬀabile Tetragramaton, 
quod in fronte tulit Aaron, quod angelice dicitur Agla, Hebraice Heloy, 
Arabice Iaym, Grece Theos, quod Deus Latine vocatur, () quo audito 
omnes exercitus celestes, terrestres et infernales tremunt et colunt, et per 
ista, que sunt Rethala, Rabam, Cauthalee, Durhulo, Archyma, Rabur, 
() quatinus a Saturninis, Iovinis, Marcialibus, Solaribus, Venereis, Mer-
curialibus, Lunaribus speris omni occasione et malivolencia cessante in 
forma benivola atque meo placati munusculo () michi in omnibus licitis 
et honestis obedire parati super sedem Samaym hic infra circulos hic cir-
cumscriptos descendere dignemini per virtutem humilitatis, quam nunc 
vobis oﬀero,”—hic debet cruciﬁgi in terra clausis oculis dicens:—() “et 
in virtute vivi et veri Dei, qui vos in iusticia et in equitate in sempiterno 
permanere concessit, cui sit gloria, laus et honor atque victoria per inﬁnita 
secula seculorum. Amen.”
() “Boel, Cafziel, Micrathon, Saterquiel, Satquiel, Raphael, 
Paamcociel, Asassaiel, Samael, Sathiel, Yturaiel, Amabiel, Raphael, 
Caphael, Dardiel, Hurathaphel, Anael, Raquiel, Salguyel, Michael, 
Myel, Sarapiel, Gabriel, Mychael, Samyel, Athithael, () venite, venite, 
venite letantes vestro obedire creatori et michi nomine ipsius, coniurati 
per nomen suum excellentissimum, quod super capud meum vobis omni-
bus ostendo”—hic ponat manum inversam super capud suum et eis sig-
num ostendat.


--- PAGE 222 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
221
acala, through Abracasap, through Abracaleus, through Zargon, through 
Abrion, through Eleyon, through Sargion.227 
(38) Therefore, O powerful angels, I invoke you, and with the invocation 
I conjure you by the authority of the Supreme Majesty, I strongly command 
you, by him who spoke and it was done, and to whom all hosts of celestial, 
terrestrial, and infernal angels are subjugated and obey, (39) and by his inef-
fable name Tetragrammaton, which Aaron wore on his forehead,228 which 
in English is called Agla, in Hebrew Heloy, in Arabic Iaym, in Greek Theos, 
which in Latin is called Deus (“God”), (40) which when heard, all heavenly, 
earthly, and infernal hosts tremble and worship,229 and by these, which are 
Rethala, Rabam, Cauthalee, Durhulo, Archyma, Rabur,230 (41) that by the 
spheres of Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the Sun, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, at every 
opportunity and without ill-will, in an agreeable form, and appeased with my 
small gift, (42) prepared to obey me in all things lawful and honest, you shall 
deign to descend from upon the seat of Samaym to these circles drawn here 
below, through the power of humility, which I offer to you now,”—here make 
the sign of the cross on the ground, with eyes closed, saying: (43) “And in the 
power of the living and true God, who has granted you to endure in perpetual 
justice and equality, to whom be glory, praise, honor, and victory, forever and 
ever. Amen.” 
(44) “Boel, Cafziel, Micrathon, Saterquiel,231 Satquiel, Raphael, Paam-
cociel, Asassaiel, Samael, Sathiel, Yturaiel, Amabiel, Raphael, Caphael, Dar-
diel, Hurathaphel, Anael, Raquiel, Salguyel, Michael, Myel, Sarapiel, Gabriel, 
Mychael, Samyel, Athithael, (45) Come! Come!, Come! be glad to obey your 
creator and me in his name, conjuring through his most excellent name, which 
I show you all now over my head”—here he should hold his hand inverted 
over his head, and show the sign232 to them.
227 SSM L.3.f.15-16: per ab, per gab, per abr, per abra, per abraca, per greba, per abracala, 
per abracasap, per abracaleus, per sargon, per abryon, per helyon, per sargyon.
228 This perhaps echoes the poem de divinis nominibus of Abbott Sigo of St Florent de 
Saumur (d. 1070). See Wilkinson, Robert J. Tetragrammaton: Western Christians and the 
Hebrew Name of God : from the Beginnings to the Seventeenth Century. 2015, p. 219.
229 See Philem. 2:10.
230 SSM L.3.f.16: Bethala, rabam, canthalee, durule, archyma, rabur.
231 So too SSM. GH marked this name as extraneous by comparison with CXIV.5 and 
CXV.6, but rather its omission from those passages seems to be the mistake.
232 SSM: the Divine Sign.


--- PAGE 223 ---
sworn book of honorius
222
() Et immediate cum taliter ter invocaveris, si non prima vice ven-
erint vel a, audies quasi fulgur descendens de celo, et erit color eorum 
nitidissimus. () Set non debent alloqui nec aspici, donec ipsi primo 
loquantur, qui dicent: “Amice, quid petis?” Tunc dicat: “Pacem et amici-
ciam vestram.” () Et si recte mundatus fueris, immediate concedent et 
dicent: “Surge et respice graciam virtutis Dei. Pete, et complebitur tibi, 
quia te misericordia Domini visitavit.” Tunc pete quod volueris, et habebis. 
() Quocienscumque aliquid de  predictis capitulis volueris, ut 
iam predictum est, voca hos angelos celestes sanctos mundum et totam 
naturam regentes in racione amantis et desiderantis Deum gloriosum. () 
Et quando venerint et te interogaverint: “Quid vis?,” postquam responderis: 
“Pacem et amiciciam vestram,” petas illud de , quod in oracionibus mun-
dacionis petivisti, () cognicionem celorum, si hanc quesivisti, vel muta-
cionem diei in noctem et e contrario, si hoc petisti, vel consecracionem 
libri, si hanc voluisti, vel utramque simul, () si de tanto fueris una opera-
cione dignus, et sic quodlibet de  dante Domino facere quibis. Quod ipse 
nobis concedat, qui vivit et regnat per inﬁnita secula seculorum. Amen. 
(Tercium opus vel tractatus) 
CXVI. Incipiunt capitula tercii tractatus huius 
operis, qui est de spiritibus aeris. 
De constriccione spirituum per verba; De constriccione spirituum per 
sigilla; () De constriccione spirituum per tabulas; De forma imponenda 
cuilibet spiritui; De inclusione spirituum; De incluso spiritu ut non respon-
deat; De fulgure et tonitruo provocando; () De combustione facienda; De 


--- PAGE 224 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
223
(46) And immediately when you have invoked them three times in this 
manner, if not after the first or second time, you will hear a sound like light-
ning descending from heaven, and their color will be most shining. (47) But 
you must not address them or look at them, until they themselves have first 
spoken. They will say: “O friend, what do you desire?” Then he should say: 
“Peace and your friendship.” (48) And if you have been properly cleaned, they 
will immediately concede and say:  “Arise and contemplate the grace and vir-
tue of God. Ask, and it will be granted to you, because the mercy of the Lord 
has visited you.” Then ask what you wish, and you shall have it.
(49) However often you might desire something from the preceding 
twenty-seven topics, as covered earlier, call these holy celestial angels ruling 
the world and all of nature because of the loving and greatly desired glori-
ous God.233 (50) And when they have come and asked you: “what do you 
want?” whereupon you should respond “Peace, and your friendship.” ask one 
of the twenty-seven, which you have sought in the prayers of purification, 
(51) knowledge of the heavens, if you have asked for this, even changing day 
into night and the opposite, if you have desired this, or consecrating a book, 
if you wish it, or likewise the others, (52) if you have been worthy to such an 
extent in one operation, you will be able to accomplish any of the twenty-
seven, Lord granting. Because he grants it to us himself, who lives and reigns 
world without end. Amen.
[The Third Work or Treatise]
CXVI. Here begins the topics of the Third Treatise of this Work, 
which is about the Spirits of the Air.
Concerning the constraint of spirits through words. Concerning the con-
straint of spirits through seals. (2) Concerning the constraint of spirits 
through tables. Concerning imposing a form to any spirit. Concerning the 
confinement of spirits. Concerning a confined spirit, whether or not it will 
answer. Calling forth lightning and thunder. (3) Concerning the required 
233 Is this a quote from Simon of Faversham (c. 1260–1306) , Quaestiones super De motu 
animalium. http://cimagl.saxo.ku.dk/download/84/84Christensen93-128.pdf p. 109 
or Peter of Auvergne (died 1304)? Compare “in ratione amantis et desiderantis” and “in 
ratione amati et desiderati” in Petrus, and Griet Galle. Questions on Aristotle’s De caelo. 
Leuven (Belgium): Leuven University Press, 2003, p. *204. 


--- PAGE 225 ---
sworn book of honorius
224
puriﬁcacione aeris; De corrupcione aeris; De nive et gelu facienda; De rore 
et pluvia facienda; De ﬂoribus et fructibus provocandis; De invisibilitate; 
() De equo, qui una nocte te portabit et reportabit ubi volueris; De absente 
quod veniat una hora sanus; De re, que deferatur in momento ubicumque 
volueris; De subtraccione rei; De revocacione rei; () De transﬁguracione 
cuiuscumque; De ﬂumine provocando in terra sicca; De commocione 
regni contra dominum; De regno vel imperio destruendo; De habenda 
potestate super quemlibet; () De habendis mille militibus armatis; De 
formacione castri indestructibilis; De speculo perverso; De destruccione 
loci vel inimici per speculum perversum; De speculo aparicionis mundi; 
() De fure et furto revocando; De ceraturis aperiendis; De discordia faci-
enda; De concordia provocanda; De habenda gracia omnium personarum 
et benivolencia; De mulieribus habendis ad libitum; () De diviciis haben-
dis; De curacione cuiuslibet inﬁrmitatis; De dando inﬁrmitatem cuilibet et 
qualemcumque placuerit operanti; De interﬁciendo quemlibet; De tem-
pestate et periculo terre et maris fuganda; () De nave retenta in mari per 
adamantem vel aliter rehabenda; De omni periculo evitando; De congrega-
cione et accepcione avium; De piscibus congregandis et accipiendis; () 
De animalibus silvestribus et domesticis congregandis et accipiendis; De 
bello faciendo inter aves vel homines vel pisces vel animalia; () De appar-
encia combustionis; De apparencia ioculatorum et puellarum balancium; 
De apparencia gardinorum vel castrorum; De apparencia militum pugnan-
cium; De apparencia griﬀonum et draconum; () De apparencia omnium 
ferarum; De apparencia venatorum cum canibus; De apparencia hominis 
quod sit alibi quam est; De apparencia tocius voluptatis. 
 Cap II:  psallencium; SSM: ballancium.


--- PAGE 226 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
225
burnings; Concerning the purification of the air. Concerning the corrup-
tion of the air. To make snow and frost. To make dew and rain. To call forth 
flowers and fruit. Concerning invisibility. (4) Concerning a horse, which will 
carry you anywhere you wish in a single night. To bring an absent person back 
safely in an hour. To transport something wherever you wish, in a moment. To 
have something removed. To recall something. (5) To transfigure anything. 
To cause a river on dry land. To incite a kingdom against its ruler. To destroy a 
kingdom or state. To have power over anyone. (6) To have a thousand armed 
soldiers. To form an indestructible fortress. How to make a mirror of destruc-
tion. How to destroy a place or an enemy using the mirror of destruction. The 
apparition of the world in a mirror (or glass). (7) To return anything which a 
thief has stolen. To open locks. To cause discord. To cause agreement. To have 
the good will and favor of all persons. To have the desire of women. (8) To 
have wealth. To cure any sickness. To make anyone sick, whenever you wish. 
To kill anyone. To hold back storms and dangers of the earth and sea. (9) To 
hold back a ship at sea using the adamant stone, or otherwise to bring it back 
again. To avoid all danger. To flock birds together, and collect them. To cause 
fish to gather and be caught. (10) To cause woodland and domestic animals 
to gather and be caught. To cause war between the birds, or people, or fish, or 
animals. (11) To make burning appear. To make appear jesters and girls bab-
bling.234 To make gardens or fortresses appear. To make appear soldiers fight-
ing. To make griffins and dragons appear. (12) To make all wild beasts appear. 
To make hunters appear with dogs. To make someone appear as if they were 
somewhere other than where they actually are. To make all pleasures appear. 
234 Chap 2:  psallencium (“singing psalms”); SSM: ballancium (“dancing”).


--- PAGE 227 ---
sworn book of honorius
226
CXVII Finitis capitulis incipit  
prohemium in spiritibus aereis. 
Cum igitur ignoratis superioribus angelorum illos constringere sit impos-
sibile, () nomina spirituum aeris et ventorum in precedenti posuimus 
capitulo; ut sui superiores clarius viderentur, et a quibus poterat quilibet 
subiugari. () Nunc autem de natura aeris et omnium spirituum in ipso 
residencium hic faciemus tractatum.
() Aer est elementum corruptibile, liquidum et subtile inter cetera 
nobilius passibiles recipiens qualitates et est simpliciter invisibilis set ipso 
composito videtur. () In quo sunt spiritus, quos sancta mater ecclesia 
dampnatos appellat, set ipsi oppositum asserunt esse verum, et ideo eos 
neque bonos neque malos volumus appellare. () Et illi spiritus in aere 
reguntur secundum ipsius aeris qualitates, et ideo eius qualitates videa-
mus. 
() Aer igitur in quantum elementum a planetarum inﬂuenciis guber-
natur. Bene igitur accipit diversas complexiones, quas nunc dicemus, () 
quia quidam sunt demones ad tribulacionem aeris constituti, quos ven-
tos Salomon appellavit, quoniam ventos excitant, et secundum quemlibet 
mutatur aer. () Et penatur spiritus illius partis, unde quilibet debet aspi-
cere ventum sue operacioni competentem, quia tunc illius partis demones 
excitantur. () Set non semper invenitur ventus invocacioni habilis. Ideo 
eos precipimus excitari, qui <tunc> aere sereno vocantur indiﬀerenter. () 
Et ideo cum angelis ventos ponemus, ut in eis veniant et vincantur; quo-
rum opera in subsequentibus sunt dicenda. 
CXVIII Divisio spirituum aeris 
Aereorum vero spirituum duo sunt modi, quoniam quidam sunt boni, 
quidam mali, quidam mites, quidam feroces. () Boni, mites et ﬁdeles sunt 


--- PAGE 228 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
227
CXVII. End of the topics, and beginning of  
the preface on the aerial spirits.
Know therefore, since it is impossible to bind those higher angels without 
knowledge about them, (2) we have listed the names of the spirits of the air 
and winds in the preceding chapter; in order that the superiors might be 
clearly seen, and through which anyone can be subjugated. (3) Therefore we 
now will prepare a treatise concerning the nature of the air and all the spirits 
residing in it. 
(4) The air is a corruptible element, fluid, and subtle, capable of receiving 
qualities from the others, and is plainly invisible, but it is seen to be composed 
of parts of itself. (5) In which are spirits, which the holy mother church calls 
damned, but they themselves assert the opposite to be true, and therefore we 
prefer to call them neither good nor evil. (6) And those spirits that are gov-
erned by air act according to the nature of air itself, and therefore we can 
understand their nature.
(7) The air therefore, insofar as an element, is governed by the influences 
of the planets. It therefore readily takes on diverse combinations, which we 
will now describe, (8) for there are certain daemons established for the distur-
bance of the air, which Solomon has called winds, because they raise up the 
winds, and behind which the air is moved. (9) And a spirit of that part may 
be compelled to serve, hence each one should consider which wind is suitable 
for the operation, because the daemons of that part are awakened then. (10) 
But the wind for the invocation is not always easily discovered. Therefore we 
order them to be raised up, which <then> are indiscriminately called calm 
air. (11) And therefore we will place the winds with the angels, in order that 
they may come to them and be conquered; their works are spoken of in the 
following sections.
CXVIII. Divisions of the spirits of the air.
There are two kinds of aerial spirits, for some are good while others are evil; 
some are mild, others wild.235 (2) The good, mild, and faithful ones are the 
eastern and western ones, and are called good, because operations with them 
235 Or cruel.


--- PAGE 229 ---
sworn book of honorius
228
illi orientales et occidentales et dicuntur boni, quia operaciones eorum 
iuvant in bono, et vix nocent alicui, nisi ad hoc cogantur divina virtute. 
() Mali sunt et cum superbia feroces australes et septemtrionales et 
dicuntur mali, quia opera eorum sunt mala in omnibus, et nocent libenter 
omnibus et vix aliquid, quod sequatur, ad bonum faciunt, nisi ad hoc supe-
riori virtute cogantur. 
() Set inter istos sunt alii collaterales istis, qui neque boni neque mali 
dicuntur, quoniam in omnibus obediunt invocanti, sive in bono fuerit sive 
in malo. De quibus hic est cognicio cuiuscumque. 
CXIX De spiritibus orientalibus 
Istorum autem  sunt in oriente regnantes et sunt subditi Soli et vento eius, 
qui boreas dicitur. Et excitantes eum sunt isti : Baxhatau <rex>, Gahatus, 
Caudes, Iarabal, () et habent hos  demones et eorum subditos excitare, 
congregare, dispergere, constringere et in loco proprio ligare, quorum 
Barthan est rex, Taadas, Caudas, Yalcal sunt ministri, () et eorum natura 
est aurum dare cum carbunculis ad libitum, divicias, graciam et benivo-
lenciam gencium impetrare, inimicicias hominum mortales vel alias dis-
solvere, homines in summis honoribus sublimare, inﬁrmitates tribuere vel 
auferre. 
() Sua corpora sunt magna et ampla, sanguinea et grosa, color eorum 
sicut aurum brunitum36 sanguine depictum. Motus eorum est celi corus-
chacio. Signum eorum est invocanti commovere sudores. 
 Du Cange: Politus, levigatus (“polished, smoothed”). http://ducange.enc.sorbonne.fr/
BRUNITUS accessed June , .


--- PAGE 230 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
229
help in good, and they rarely harm anyone, unless they are forced with divine 
strength. 
(3) The evil, arrogant, and wild ones are the southern and northern ones, 
and are called evil, because their works are evil in everything, and they will-
ingly harm anyone, and will scarcely do good for anyone unless they are forced 
with superior strength. 
(4) But between those, there are others on both sides of them, which are 
said to be neither of good nor of evil, because they obey in everything when 
invoked, whether it be for good or evil. Concerning these, here is the informa-
tion on each:
CXIX. Concerning the Spirits of the East.
But of those there are four governing in the East, and they are subordinate 
to the Sun and its wind, which is called the North wind. And there are four 
(spirits) raising it up: Baxhatau, Gahatus, Caudes, Iarabal, (2) and they 
have these four daemons and their subordinates to raise up, congregate, scat-
ter, constrain, and bind to their proper place, of which Barthan is the king, 
Taadas, Caudas, Yalcal are the ministers, (3) and their nature is to give gold 
with carbuncles as desired; also to obtain wealth, gratitude, and good will of 
the population; likewise to dissolve the hostility of people and other beings; 
and to raise people to high honors, and to grant or take away weaknesses. 
(4) Their bodies are great and large, bloody and thick;236 their color is 
like polished gold, painted with blood. Their movement is like the glittering 
of the sky. The sign that they have appeared is that the one who calls them will 
break into a sweat. 
236 S3853: gratiosa (“agreeable”).


--- PAGE 231 ---
sworn book of honorius
230
CXX De spiritibus occidentalibus 
Occidentales sunt illi , quibus omnes alii regionis demones subduntur, 
quorum Harthan est rex, Bileth, Milalu, Habuchaba eius ministri, et sunt 
subditi Lune et vento eius, qui zephirus dicitur. () Et excitantes [eum] sunt 
isti: Hebethel, Amocap, Oilol, Myla<l>u, Abuchaba, et habent hos  
demones et eorum subditos excitare, congregare, dispergere, constringere 
ac in loco proprio ligare, () quorum natura est argentum ad libitum dare, 
res de loco ad locum deferre, equum velocitatis tribuere, facta et secreta 
presencia atque preterita dicere personarum. 
() Sua corpora sunt magna et ampla, mollia et ﬂeumatica, color 
eorum sicut nubes obscura et tenebrosa, et habent multum inﬂatum, ocu-
los rubeos aqua plenos, non habent pilos in capite, et dentes ut aper. () 
Motus eorum est sicut magna maris ruina, et signum est, quod magna plu-
via iuxta circulum cadere videbitur invocanti. 
CXXI De spiritibus meridionalibus 
Meridionales sunt isti: Iammax rex, Carmox, Ichanol, Pasfran, quibus 
omnes alii regionis demones subduntur, et sunt subditi Marti et vento eius, 
qui subsolanus dicitur. () Et excitantes eum sunt isti : Atraurbiabilis, 
Yaconaababur, Carmeal, Innial, Proathophas, et habent hos demones 
et eorum subditos excitare, constringere, dispergere, congregare ac in loco 
proprio ligare. () Sua natura est guerras et mortalitates, occisiones, prodi-
ciones et combustiones facere, mille milites cum suis famulis, que sunt duo 
milia, ad tempus dare et mortem tribuere, cuicumque inﬁrmitatem et sani-
tatem tribuere. 
() Sua corpora sunt parva, macra, colerica, in aspectu turpissima, 
color eorum sicut cuprum ignitum modicum denigratum. Habent cor-
nua ad modum cervi, ungues ad modum grifonum. () Ululant sicut tauri 
insani. Motus eorum quasi combustionis partis sue realis aspeccio. Signum 
est, quod fulgur et tonitruum iuxta circulum cadere videbitur invocanti. 


--- PAGE 232 ---
Sworn Book of Honorius
231
CXX. Concerning the Spirits of the West.
The western ones are four, and all other daemons of the region are under 
them, of which Harthan is the king, Bileth, Milalu, and Habuchaba are his 
ministers, and they are subordinate to the Moon and its wind, which is called 
Zephyr. (2) And raising it up are these: Hebethel, Amocap, Oilol, Mylau, 
and Abuchaba, and they have these four daemons and their subordinates to 
raise up, congregate, scatter, constrain, and bind to their proper place. (3) 
Their nature is to give silver as desired; they also carry things from place to 
place; they grant speed to horses; they tell the secrets of persons present and 
past. 
(4) Their bodies are large and ample, soft and phlegmatic, their color 
resembles dark and obscure clouds, and they have red eyes full of water, greatly 
inflated; they have no hair on their heads, and their teeth are like those of a 
boar. (5) Their movement is like a great rushing down of the sea, and the sign 
is that great rainfall will be seen near the circle when they are invoked. 
CXXI. Concerning the Spirits of South.237 
Those of the South are these: Iammax the king, Carmox, Ichanol, Pasfran, 
to whom all other daemons of the region are subordinate, and they are subor-
dinate to Mars and its wind, which is called the Eastern wind. (2) And raising 
it up are these five: Atraurbiabilis, Yaconaababur, Carmeal, Innial, Pro-
athophas, and they have these daemons and their subordinates to raise up, 
constrain, disperse, congregate, and bind in proper place. (3) Their nature is to 
cause war, and plague, murders, treasons, and burnings; they also temporarily 
give one thousand soldiers with their servants, which are two thousand, and 
they grant death; they also grant sickness or health to anyone. 
(4) Their bodies are small, thin, choleric, and very ugly in appearance, 
their color is like copper that has been blackened a little by fire. They have 
horns like those of a stag, and nails like a griffin. (5) They howl like mad bulls. 
Their movement is somewhat like the burning of part of their true appear-
ance.238 The sign is that lightning and thunder will be seen to fall near the 
circle when they are invoked. 
237 Cp. CVII.
238 Compare OP4: Apparebunt longo corpore, cholerico, et aspectum turpissimo: 


