rits could be fraied awaie with such externall toies : 
howbeit, these are right inchantments, as Brentiiis affirmeth. 
But certeinlie, it is neither a witch, nor divell, but a glorious* God 
that maketh the thunder. I have read in the scriptures, that God'' 
maketh the blustering tempests and whirlewinds : and I find that it 
is'= the Lord that altogither dealeth with them, and that they'^ blowe 
according to his will. But let me see anie of them all^ rebuke and 
still the sea in time of tempest, as Christ did ; or raise the stormie 
wind, as ' God did with his word ; and I will beleeve in them. Hath 
B 
Job. 5. 
Matth. II. 
2 
In concTotte. 
"Psal. 25. 
bPsal. 83. 
Eccles. 43, 
^ Luke- 8- 
Matth. 8. 
eMark. 4,41. 
Luke. 8, 14. 
fPsal. 170.

--- PAGE 100 ---
2 Chap. I. TAe discoverie 
ejob. 38, 22. anie witch or conjurer, or anie creature entred into the « treasures of 
2. the snowe ; or scene/ the secret places of the haile, which GOD hath 
prepared against the daie of trouble, battell, and warre? I for my part 
Eccies. 43. also thinkewith Jesus Sirach, that at Gods onelie commandement the 
snowe falleth ; and that the wind bloweth according to his will, who 
tLeviti. 26. onelie maketh all stormes to cease; and*^ who (if we keepe his 
^erse. 3 4. Ordinances) will send us raine in due season, and make the land to 
bring forth hir increase, and the trees of the field to give their fruit, 
ipsai. 78, 23. But little thinke our witchmongers, that the ' Lord commandeth the 
clouds above, or openeth the doores of heaven, as David affirmeth ; 
or that the Lord goeth forth in the tempests and stormes, as the 
kNahum. i. Prophet Nahiivi reporteth: but rather that witches and conjurers are 
then about their businesse. 
The Martioiiists acknowledged one God the authour of good things, 
and another the ordeiner of evill : but these make the divell a whole 
god, to create -things of nothing, to knowe mens cogitations, and to 
doo that which God never did ; as, to transubstantiate men into beasts, 
J. &c. Which thing if divels could doo, / yet followeth it not, that 
witches have such power. But if all the divels in hell were dead, 
and all the witches in En^la?id burnt or hanged ; I warrant you we 
should not faile to have raine, haile and tempests, as now we have : 
according to the appointment and will of God, and according to the 
constitution of the elements, and the course of the planets, wherein 
God hath set a perfect and perpetuall order. 
I am also well assured, that if all the old women in the world were 
witches ; and all the priests, conjurers : we should not have a drop 
ijob. 26, 8 of raine, nor a blast of wind the more or the lesse for them. For Hhe 
Psaime. 135. Lord hath bound the waters in the clouds, and hath set bounds 
jer. 10& 15- about the waters, untill the daie and night come to an end : yea it is 
God that raiseth the winds and stilleth them : and he saith to the 
m Ose. 13. raine and snowe ; Be upon the earth, and it falleth. The °» wind of the 
Lord, and not the wind of witches, shall destroie the treasures of 
their plesant vessels, and drie up the fountaines ; saith Oseas. Let 
"Psa. 39, &c. us also learne and confesse with the Prophet Z?aw^/, that we ° our 
selves are the causes of our afflictions ; and not exclaime upon 
witches, when we should call upon God for mercie. 
In epist. ad The Imperiall lawe (saith Breiitius) condemneth them to death 
Jo. wieruvi. trouble and infect the aire : but I affirme (saith he) that it is 
neither in the power of witch not divell so to doo, but in God onelie. 
Though (besides Bodin, and all the popish writers in generall) it 
please Daiiceies, Hyperms, Heniingms, Erastus, &c. to conclude 
oExod. 13. otherwise. The clouds" are called the pillers of Gods tents, Gods 
pTi8, n. 19. chariots, and his pavillions. And if it be so, what witch or divell can

--- PAGE 101 ---
of Witchcraft. Chap. 2. 
make maisteries therof ? S. Augustine saith, Non est putandiiin istis August. 3. de 
., ,. . , , . , ,. sancta Trinit, 
transgressoribiis angelisservi7-e nanc7'eruiii visibilium viaterievi^sed sou 
Deo: We must not thinke that these visible things are at thecommande- 
ment of the angels that fell, but are obedient to the onelie God. 
Finallie, if witches could accomplish these things ; what needed it 
seeme so strange to the people, when Christ by miracle p commanded pMar. 4,41. 
both seas and winds, &c. For it is written ; Who is this .'' for both 
wind and sea obeie him./ 
The second Chapter. 3. 
The inconvenience growing by mens a'edtilitie herein, with a re- 
proofe of some churchmett, which are inclined to the common 
conceived opinion of witches omnipotencie, and a familiar example 
thereof. 
^UT the world is now so bewitched and over-run with this 
fond error, that even where a man shuld seeke comfort 
and counsell, there shall hee be sent (in case of necessitie) 
from God to the divell ; and from the Physician, to the 
coosening witch, who will not sticke to take upon hir, by wordes 
to heale the lame (which was proper onelie to Christ ; and to 
them whom he assisted with his divine power) yea, with hir 
familiar & charmes she will take upon hir to cure the blind : though 
in the* tenth of S. fohns Gospell it be written, that the divell cannot *Joh. lo, n. 
open the eies of the blind. And they attaine such credit as I have 
heard (to my greefe) some of the ministerie affirme, that they have 
had in their parish at one instant, xvii. or xviii. witches : meaning 
such as could worke miracles supernaturallie. Whereby they 
manifested as well their infidelitie and ignorance, in conceiving Gods 
word ; as their negligence and error in instructing their flocks. For 
they themselves might understand, and also teach their parishoners, 
that God onelie worketh great woonders : and that it is he which ''P^ai. 72, & 156. 
. . Jereraie, 5. 
sendeth such punishments to the wicked, and such trials to the elect : 
according to the saieng of the Prophet Haggai,'' I smote you with c Hag. 2,28. 
blasting and mildeaw, and with haile, in all the labours of your hands ; 
and yet you turned not unto me, saith the Lord. And therefore saith 
the same Prophet in another place ; ^ You have sowen much, and bring Idem. cap. i, 6. 
in little. And both in ^foel and ^Leviticus, the like phrases and proofes "Joel. i. 
are used and made. But more shalbe said of this hereafter. Le\m. 2 
. 
S. Paule fore-sawe the blindnesse and obstinacie, both of these 
blind shepheards, and also of their scabbed sheepe, when he said ;/ j. 
8 They will not suffer wholsome doctrine, but having their eares itching, s 2 Tim. 4, 34. 
shall get them a heape of teachers after their own lusts ; and shall

--- PAGE 102 ---
4 Chap. 2. The discover ie 
turne their eares from the truth, and shall be given to fables. And 
1' 1 Tim. 4. 1 h in the latter time some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed 
to spirits of errors, and doctrines of divels, which speake lies (as 
vi^itches and conjurers doo) but cast thou awaie such prophane and 
old wives fables. In which sense Basil saith ; Who so giveth heed to 
inchanters, hearkeneth to a fabulous and frivolous thing. But I will 
rehearse an example whereof I my selfe am not onelie Ociilatiis testis, 
but have examined the cause, and am to justifie the truth of my 
report : not bicause I would disgrace the ministers that are godlie, 
but to confirme my former assertion, that this absurd error is growne 
into the place, which should be able to expell all such ridiculous follie 
and impietie. 
Margaret'sinions, the Essises holden at Rochester, Anno 1581, one Margaret 
a supposed witch. Sivions,! the wife of John Simons, of Brenchlie in Kent, was araigned 
for witchcraft, at the instigation and complaint of divers fond and 
malicious persons ; and speciallie by the meanes of one John Ferrall 
vicar of that parish : with whom I talked about that matter, and 
found him both fondlie assotted in the cause, and enviouslie bent 
towards hir : and (which is worse) as unable to make a good account 
of his faith, as shee whom he accused. That which he, for his part, 
laid to the poore womans charge, was this. 
His Sonne (being an ungratious boie, and prentise to one Robert 
Scotchford clothier, dwelling in that parish of Brenchlie') passed on a 
daie by hir house ; at whome by chance hir little dog barked. Which 
thing the boie taking in evill part, drewe his knife, & pursued him 
therewith even to hir doore : whom she rebuked with some such 
words as the boie disdained, & yet neverthelesse would not be per- 
suaded to depart in a long time. At the last he returned to his 
maisters house, and within five or sixe dales fell sicke. Then was 
called to mind the fraie betwixt the dog and the boie : insomuch as 
the vicar (who thought himselfe so privileged, as he little mistrusted 
that God would visit his children with sicknes) did so calculate ; as 
he found, partlie through his owne judgement, and partlie (as he him- 
6. selfe told/ me) by the relation of other witches, that his said Sonne was 
by hir bewitched. Yea, he also told me, that this his sonne (being as 
it were past all cure) received perfect health at the hands of another 
witch. 
He proceeded yet further against hir, affirming, that alwaies in his 
parish church, when he desired to read most plainelie, his voice so failed 
him, as he could scant be heard at all. Which hee could impute, he 
said, to nothing else, but to hir inchantment. When I advertised the 
poore woman hereof, as being desirous to heare what she could saie 
for hir selfe ; she told me, that in verie deed his voice did much faile

--- PAGE 103 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 3. 
5 
him, speciallie when he strained himselfe to speake lowdest. How 
beit, she said that at all times his voice was hoarse and lowe : which 
thing I perceived to be true. But sir, said she, you shall understand, 
that this our vicar is diseased with such a kind of hoarsenesse, as 
divers of our neighbors in this parish, not long since, doubted that he 
had the French pox ; & in that respect utterly refused to communi- 
cate with him: untill such time as (being therunto injoined by 
M. D. Lewen the Ordinarie) he had brought fr5 London a certificat, 
under the hands of two physicians, that his hoarsenes proceeded from 
a disease in the lungs. Which certificat he published in the church, 
in the presence of the whole congregation : and by this meanes hee 
was cured, or rather excused of the shame of his disease. And this I 
knowe to be true by the relation of divers honest men of that parish. 
And truelie, if one of the Jurie had not beene wiser than the other, she 
had beene condemned thereupon, and upon other as ridiculous matters 
as this. For the name of a witch is so odious, and hir power so 
feared among the common people, that if the honestest bodie living 
chance to be arraigned therupon, she shall hardlie escape condem- 
nation./ 
The third Chapter. 7. 5. 
Who they be that are called witches, with a manifest declaration of 
the cause that mooveth men so commonlie to thijike, and witches 
themselves to beleeve that they can hurt children, cattell, Qr'c. with 
words and imaginations : and of coosening witches. 
NE sort of such as are said to bee witches, are women 
which be commonly old, lame, bleare-eied, pale, fowle, 
and full of wrinkles ; poore, sullen, superstitious, and 
papists ; or such as knowe no religion : in whose 
drousie minds the divell hath goten a fine seat ; so as, what 
mischeefe, mischance, calamitie, or slaughter is brought to passe, 
they are easilie persuaded the same is doone by themselves ; 
inprinting in their minds an earnest and constant imagination Cardan, devar. 
hereof. They are leane and deformed, shewing melancholic in their 
faces, to the horror of all that see them. They are doting, scolds, 
mad, divelish ; and not much differing from them that are thought to 
be possessed with spirits ; so firme and stedfast in their opinions, as 
whosoever shall onelie have respect to the constancie of their words 
uttered, would easilie beleeve they were true indeed. 
These miserable wretches are so odious unto all their neighbors, 
and so feared, as few dare offend them, or denie them anie thing they 
aske : whereby they take upon them ; yea, and sometimes thinke, 
that they can doo such things as are beyond the abilitie of humane

--- PAGE 104 ---
6 Chap 3. The discoverie 
nature. These go from house to house, and from doore to doore for a 
pot full of milke, yest, drinke, pottage, or some such releefe ; without 
the which they could hardlie live : neither obtaining for their service 
and paines, nor by their art, nor yet at the divels hands (with whome 
they are said to make a perfect and visible bargaine) either beautie, 
monie, promotion, welth, worship, pleasure, honor, knowledge, 
8. learning, or anie other benefit whatsoever. / 
It falleth out many times, that neither their necessities, nor their 
expectation is answered or served, in those places where they beg or 
borrowe ; but rather their lewdnesse is by their neighbors reprooved. 
And further, in tract of time the witch waxeth odious and tedious to 
hir neighbors ; and they againe are despised and despited of hir : so 
as sometimes she cursseth one, and sometimes another ; and that 
from the maister of the house, his wife, children, cattell, &c. to the 
little pig that lieth in the stie. Thus in processe of time they have all 
displeased hir, and she hath wished evill lucke unto them all ; perhaps 
with cursses and imprecations made in forme. Doubtlesse (at length) 
some of hir neighbors die, or fall sicke ; or some of their children are 
visited with diseases that vex them strangelie : as apoplexies, 
epilepsies, convulsions, hot fevers, wormes, &c. Which by ignorant 
parents are supposed to be the vengeance of witches. Yea and their 
opinions and conceits are / confirmed and maintained by unskilful! 
physicians : according to the common saieng ; IitsciticB pallium 
7naleficiiii)i 6-° incantatio, Witchcraft and inchantment is the cloke 
of ignorance : whereas indeed evill humors, & not strange words, 
witches, or spirits are the causes of such diseases. Also some of their 
cattell perish, either by disease or mischance. Then they, upon whom 
such adversities fall, weighing the fame that goeth upon this woman 
(hir words, displeasure, and cursses meeting so justlie with their mis- 
fortune) doo not onelie conceive, but also are resolved, that all their 
mishaps are brought to passe by hir onelie meanes. 
The witch on the other side exspecting hir neighbours mischances, 
and seeing things sometimes come to passe according to hir wishes, 
/ Bodin li. 2. de cursses, and incantations (for Bodin himselfe confesseth, that not 
di^mono : cap. g. above two in a hundred of their witchings or wishings take effect) 
being called before a Justice, by due examination of the circumstances 
is driven to see hir imprecations and desires, and hir neighbors 
harmes and losses to concurre, and as it were to take effect : and so 
confesseth that she (as a goddes) hath brought such things to passe. 
Wherein, not onelie she, but the accuser, and also the Justice are 
fowlie deceived and abused ; as being thorough hir confession and 
other circumstances persuaded (to the injurie of Gods glorie) that she 
g hath doone, or can doo that which / is proper onelie to God himselfe.

--- PAGE 105 ---
of Witclm-aft. 
Chap. 4. 
7 
Another sort of witches there are, which be absolutelie cooseners. 
These take upon them, either for glorie, fame, or gaine, to doo anie 
thing, which God or the divell can doo : either for foretelling of things 
to come, bewraieng of secrets, curing of maladies, or working of 
miracles. But of these I will talke more at large heereafter. 
The fourth Chapter. 
What miraailous actions are imputed to witches by witchmongers, 
papists, and poets. 
|LTHOUGH it be quite against the haire, and contrarie to 
the divels will, contrarie to the witches oth, promise, and 
homage, and contrarie to all reason, that witches should 
helpe anie thing that is bewitched ; but rather set forward 
their maisters businesse : yet we read In inalleo maleficarum, Mai. Male/, par. 
. , , . , , , ■ rr- 1 1 11 1 ■ 2. quixst.i. cap,2. 
of three sorts of witches ; and the same is atnrmed by all the writers 
heereupon, new and old. One sort (they say) can hurt and not 
helpe, the second can helpe and not hurt, the third can both helpe 
and hurt. And among the hurtfull witches he saith there is one 
sort more beastlie than any kind of beasts, saving woolves : for these 
usuallie devoure and eate yong children and infants of their owne 
kind. These be they (saith he) that raise haile, tempests, and hurtfull 
weather ; as lightening, thunder, &c. These be they that procure 
barrennesse in man, woman, and beast. These can throwe children 
into waters, as they walke with their mothers, and / not be seene. 7. 
These can make horsses kicke, till they cast the riders. These can 
passe from place to place in the aire invisible. These can so alter 
the mind of judges, that they can have no power to hurt them. These 
can procure to themselves and to others, taciturnitie and insensibilitie 
in their torments. These can bring trembling to the hands, and 
strike terror into the minds of them that apprehend them. These can 
manifest unto others, things hidden and lost, and foreshew / things 10. 
to come ; and see them as though they were present. These can 
alter mens minds to inordinate love or hate. These can kill whom 
they list with lightening and thunder. These can take awaie mans 
courage, and the power of generation. These can make a woman 
miscarrie in childbirth, and destroie the child in the mothers wombe, 
without any sensible meanes either inwardlie or outwardlie applied. 
These can with their looks kill either man or beast. 
All these things are avowed by James Sprenger and Henrie Institor 
hi malleo maleficarum, to be true, & confirmed by Nider, and the 
inquisitor Cumanus ; and also by DancEtis, Hyperius, Heniingius, and 
multiplied by Bodinus, and frier Bartholo7ncBus Spineus. But bicause 
I will in no wise abridge the authoritie of their power, you shall have

--- PAGE 106 ---
8 
Chap. 4. 
The discoverie 
*Ovid. lib. 
metamor- 
fhoseon 7. 
Danceus in 
dialog. 
Pselhis in 
operations 
deem. 
Virg.in Damo 
Hora. epod. 5. 
Tibul.de/ascinat. 
lib. I . eleg. 2. 
Ovid, epist 4. 
Lex. 12. 
1 abularum. 
Mai. Male/. 
Litcd. de hello 
civili. lib. 6. 
Virg. eclog. 8. 
Cvid. de remedio 
amoris. lib. i. 
Hyperius. 
£rastus. 
Rich. Gal. in his 
horrible treatise. 
Heviingiiis. 
Bar. Spineus. 
Bryan Darcy 
Con/essio 
Windesor. 
Virgil. Aeneid. 4. 
C. Manliits 
astrol. lib. i. 
II. 
Mai. Male/, 
part. 2. quccst 
I. cap. 14. 8. 
I . Cor 9, 9. 
also the testimonies of mania other grave authors in this behalfe ; as 
followeth. 
*And first Ovid afifirmeth,that they can raise and suppresse Hghtening 
and thunder, raine and haile, clouds and winds, tempests and earth- 
quakes. Others doo write, that they can pull downe the moone and 
the starres. Some write that with wishing they can send needles into 
the livers of their enimies. Some that they can transferre corne in 
the blade from one place to another. Some, that they can cure 
diseases supernaturallie, flie in the aire, and danse with divels. Some 
write, that they can plaie the part of Succubiis, and contract them- 
selves to Incubus J and so yoong prophets are upon them begotten, &c. 
Som sale they can transubstantiate themselves and others, and take 
the forms and shapes of asses, woolves, ferrets, cowes, apes, horsses, 
dogs, &c. Some say they can keepe divels and spirits in the likenesse 
of todes and cats. 
They can raise spirits (as others affirme) drie up springs, turne the 
course of running waters, inhibit the sunne, and stale both day and 
night, changing the one into the other. They can go in and out 
at awger holes, & saile in an egge shell, a cockle or muscle shell, 
through and under the tempestuous seas. They can go invisible, 
and deprive men of their privities, and otherwise of the act and 
use of venerie. They can bring soules out of the graves. They 
can teare snakes in peeces with words, and with looks kill 
lambes. But in this case a man may sale, that Miranda canunt / 
sed 7ion credenda Poeta. They can also bring to passe, that chearne 
as long as you list, your butter will not come ; especiallie, if either 
the maids have eaten up the creame ; or the goodwife have sold the 
butter before in the market. Whereof I have had some triall, 
although there may be true and naturall causes to hinder the common 
course thereof : as for example. Put a little sope or sugar into your 
chearne of creame, and there will never come anie butter, chearne as 
long as you list. But M. Mai. saith, that there is not so little a 
village, where manie women are not that / bewitch, infect, 
and kill kine, and drie up the milke : alledging for the 
strengthening of that assertion, the saie- 
ing of the Apostle, Nimquid 
Deo aira est de bobtis f 
Dooth God take 
anie care of 
oxen ?

--- PAGE 107 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 5. 
The fift Chapter. 
A confutation of the commoti conceived opinion of witches and 
witchcraft, and how detestable a sinne it is to repaire to thetn for 
counsell or helpe in time of affliction. 
UT whatsoever is reported or conceived of such maner of 
witchcrafts, I dare avow to be false and fabulous (coosin- 
age, dotage, and poisoning excepted :) neither is there 
any mention made of these kind of witches in the Bible. 
If Christ had knowne them, he would not have pretermitted to 
invaie against their presumption, in taking upon them his office : 
as, to heale and cure diseases ; and to worke such miraculous and 
supernaturall things, as whereby he himselfe was speciallie knowne, 
beleeved, and published to be God ; his actions and cures consist- 
ing (in order and effect) according to the power by our witch- 
moongers imputed to witches. Howbeit, if there be any in these 
dales afflicted in such strange sort, as Christs cures and patients 
are described in the new testament to have beene : we flie from 
trusting in God to trusting in witches, who doo not onelie in their 
coosening art take on them the office of Christ in this behalfe ; but 
use his verie phrase of speech to such idolaters, as com to seeke 
divine / assistance at their hands, saieng ; Go thy waies, thy Sonne or js. 
thy daughter, &c. shall doo well, and be whole. 
It will not suffice to dissuade a witchmonger from his credulitie, that 
he seeth the sequele and event to fall out manie times contrarie to their 
assertion ; but in such case (to his greater condemnation) he seeketh 
further to witches of greater fame. If all faile, he will rather thinke 
he came an houre too late ; than that he went a mile too far. Trulie 
I for my part cannot perceive what is to go a whoring after strange 
gods, if this be not. He that looketh upon his neighbors wife, and 
lusteth after hir, hath committed adulterie. And truelie, he that in 
hart and by argument mainteineth the sacrifice of the masse to be 
propitiatorie for the quicke and the dead, is an idolater ; as also he 
that alloweth and commendeth creeping to the crosse, and such like 
idolatrous actions, although he bend not his corporall knees. 
In like manner I say, he that attributeth to a witch, such divine 
power, as dulie and onelie apperteineth unto GOD (which all witch- 
mongers doo) is in hart a blasphemer, an idolater, and full of grosse 
impietie, although he neither go nor send to hir for assistance. / 
John. 5 : 6. 
Mark. 5. 34. 
To go to witches, 
&c. is idolatrie. 
c

