
that is, that by the private insinuation, and as it were incorporating 
themselves into the affection, or desire of the Witch, or Magician ; 
they may totally convert him into their own nature : reducing him at 
last by constant practice, to such obdurateness and hardness of heart, 
that he becometh one with them, and delighted with their association, 
being altogether dead to any motions in himself that may be called 
good. 
3. And if we may credit example, which is the surest proof ; the 
1

--- PAGE 591 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. i. 
493 
tion. 
very imaginations, and affection of a Magician, doth create an evil The original 
Essence or Devil ; which was not before in being : for, as the Astral °^ '^^'^ 
Spirits are believed by many to Germinate and procreate one another, 
so likewise are the infernal Spirits capable of multiplication in their 
power and essence, according to their Orders, Ranks and Thrones ; 
by means of the strong imagination in a Witch, or malevolous person, 
earnestly desiring their assistance. 
4. Not that the Spirits or Devils so begotten do any whit add or Their Germi- 
contribute to the number in general ; for as they are capable of 
increasing into distinct and separated substances, so are they likewise 
again contracted, and as it were annihilated ; when the force of that 
Imagination is gone, which was the cause of their production : The 
nature of a spirit, whither heavenly or hellish, being to dilate, or con- 
tract themselves into as narrow compass, as they please ; so that in 
a moment they can be as big in circumference as an hundred worlds, 
and on a sodain reduce themselves to the compass of an atome. 
5. Neither are they somuch limited as Tradition would have them ; Their Habita- 
for they are not at all shut up in any separated place : but can remove 
millions of miles in the twinkling of an eye, yet are they still where 
they were at first : for, out of their own element, or quality, they can 
never come : go whither they will, they are in darkness : and the 
cause is within them, not without them : as one whose mind is 
troubled here in Etigland, can remove/ his Carcase from the place 40. 
where it was before ; but should he go to the utmost bounds of the 
Earth, he cannot leave his perplexed and tormented minde behind 
him. 
6. As for the shapes and various likenesses of Devils, It is gener- Their shapes, 
ally believed, that according to their various capacities in wickedness, 
so their shapes are answerable after a Magical manner .• resembhng 
spiritually some horrid and ugly monsters, as their conspiracies 
against the power of God, were high and monstrous, when they fell 
from Heaven : for the condition of some of them is nothing but 
continual horrour and despair ; others triumph in firie might and 
pomp, attempting to pluck God from out of his Throne ; but the 
quality of Heaven is shut from them, that they can never find it, 
which doth greatly add to their torment and misery. 
7. But that they are materially vexed and scorched in flames of Their place of 
fire, is inferiour to any to give credit to, who is throughly verst in ^ g^j"""^ °^ 
their nature and existence : for their substance is spiritual ; yea their 
power is greater, then to be detain'd or tormented with any thing 
without them : doubtless their misery is sufficiently great, but not 
through outward flames ; for their Bodies are able to pierce through 
Wood and Iron, Stone, and all Terrestrial things : Neither is all the

--- PAGE 592 ---
494 
Book 11. A DiscouTse concerning 
fire, or fewel of this World able to torment them ; for in a moment 
they can pierce it through and through. But the infinite source of 
their misery is ixi themselves, and is continually before them, so that 
they can never enjoy any rest, being absent from the presence of 
God .• which torment is greater to them, then all the tortures of this 
world combin'd together. 
The cause of -phe wicked souls that are departed this life, are also capable of 
their torment. . . ... 
appearmg agam, and answermg the Conjurations of Witches, and 
Magicians, for a time : according to Nagar the Indiaji, and the 
Pythagoreans. And it cannot be easily conceived, that their torment 
is much different from the rest of the Devils : for the Scripture saith: 
every one is rewarded according to their works. And, that which a 
man sows, that he shall reap. Now as the damned Spirits, when 
they lived on earth, did heap up vanity, and load their souls with 
iniquity, as a treasure to carry with them into that Kingdom, which 
sin doth naturally lead into .■ so when they are there, the same 
abominations which here they committed, do they ruminate and feed 
upon ; and the greater they have been, the greater is the torment, 
that ariseth before them every moment. 
How Magici- 9. And although these Infernal Spirits, are open Enemies to the 
them'!'^^' ^^"'^ means which God hath appointed for mans salvation ; yet such 
is the degenerate and corrupted mind of mankind, that there is in 
the same an itching after them for converse and familiarity, to pro- 
cure their assistance, in any thing that their vain imagination sug- 
gesteth them with : to effect which, they inform themselves in every 
Tradition of Conjuration and Exorcism ; as also in the names, 
natures and powers of Devils in general, and are ever restless, till 
their souls be totally devoted to that accursed and detestable nature, 
which is at enmity with God and goodness. 
The Orders of )o. Now to procccd in the description of these Infernal Spirits 
ings^.*" ^ and separated Damons, or Astral Beiiigs, as also of those in the 
Angelical Kingdom ; they that pertain to the Kingdom of Heaven, 
are either Angels which are divided into their degrees and orders ; 
or else the righteous souls departed, who are entred into rest : And 
it cannot be, but that the life of Angels and Souls departed, is the 
same in Heaven, as also the food that nourisheth them, and the fruits 
that spring before them .■ Nor is it possible for any, how expert so 
ever in Magical Arts, to compel either of them, of what degree so- 
ever they be, to present themselves, or appear before them : Although 
many have written large Discourses and Forms of Convocation, to 
compel the Angels unto communication with them by Magical Rites 
and Ceremonies. 
Thattheyare n. It may indeed be believed, that seeing there are infinite num-

--- PAGE 593 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap, ii. 
495 
bers of Angels, they are also imployed for the glory of God, and 
protection of man/kind, (but not subject to Conjurations :) And that 
they accompany many righteous men Invisibly, and protect Cities 
and Countries from Plagues, War, and infestings of wicked Spirits, 
against which Principalities and Powers of Darkness, it is their place 
to contend and war, to the confusion of the Kingdom of Darkness. 
12. But such Spirits as belong to this outward World, and are of 
the Elemental quality, subject to a beginning and ending, and to 
degrees of continuance ; These may be solicited by Conjurations, 
and can also inform Magicians in all the secrets of Nature ; yet so 
darkly, (because they want the outward organ) ; that it is hardly 
possible for any that hath fellowship with them, to learn any manual 
operation perfectly and distinctly from them. 
13. Many have insisted upon the Natures of these Astral Spirits : 
some alledging, That they are part of the fain Angels^ and conse- 
quently subject to the torments of Hell at the last fudgment : Others, 
That they are the departed soids of inen and zuojnen, confned to these 
outward Elements until the Consummatioti : Lastly, others. As Del 
rio, Nagar the Indian Magician, and the Platonists afifirm, That their 
nature is middle between Heaven and Hell ; and that they reign in 
a third Kijigdom from both, having no other judgment or doo7n to 
expect for ever. 
14. But to speak more nearly unto their natures, they are of the 
source of the Stars, and have their degrees of continuance, where of* 
some live hundreds, some thousands of years : Their food is the Gas 
of the Water, and the Bias of the Air .• And in their Aspects, or 
countenances, they differ as to vigour and cheerfulness : They occupy 
various places of this world ; as Woods, Mountains, Waters, Air, fiery 
Flames, Clouds, Starrs, Mines, and hid Treasures : as also antient 
Buildings, and places of the slain. Some again are familiar in Houses, 
and do frequently converse with, and appear unto mortals. 
15. They are capable of hunger, grief, passion, and vexation: they 
have not any thing in them that should bring them unto God .• being 
meerly composed of the most spiritual part of the Elemeutst: And 
when they are worn out, they return into their proper essence or 
primary quality again ; as Ice when it is resolved into Water : They 
meet in mighty Troops, and wage warr one with another : They do 
also procreate one another; and have power sometimes to make great 
commotions in the Air, and in the Clowds, and also to cloath them- 
selves with visible bodies, out of the four Elements, appearing in 
Companies upon Hills and Mountains, and do often deceive and 
delude the observers of Apparitions, who take such for portents of 
great alterations, which are nothing but the sports and pastime of 
not subject to 
conjurations. 
41. 
What Spirits 
may be con- 
jured. 
The nature of 
the Astral Spi 
rits. 
Their degrees 
[* whereof] 
Their actions 
and affections 
[t n reversed'^

--- PAGE 594 ---
Book II. 
A Discourse concerning 
these frolick Spirits : as Armies in the Air, Troops marching on the 
Land, noises and slaughter, Tempest and Lightning, &^c. 
J 6. These Astral Spirits are variously to be considered ; some are 
beings separate and absolute, that are not constitute to any work or 
service : Others are subservient to the Angels that have dominion 
over the Influences of the Stars : Others are the Astral Spirits of 
men departed, which (if the party deceased was disturbed and 
troubled at his decease,) do for many years, continue in the source of 
this world ; amongst these airy Spirits, to the great disquietness of 
the soul of the person, to whom they belong : Besides the causes are 
various that such Spirits rest not ; i. When by Witchcraft they are 
inchanted, and bound to wander so many years ; as thrice or fourtimes 
seven, before they can be resolved into nothing. 2. When the person 
hath been murthered ; so that the Spirit can never be at rest, till the 
crime be discovered. 3. When desires and lusts, after Wife, or 
Children, House, Lands, or Money, is very strong at their departure; 
it is a certain truth, that this same spirit belonging to the Starrs will 
be hanckering after these things, and drawn back by the strong 
desires and fixation of the Imagination, which is left behind it : Nor 
can it ever be at rest, till the thing be accomplished, for which it is 
disturbed. 4. When Treasure hath been hid, or any secret thing 
hath been commit/ted by the party ; there is a magical cause of 
something attracting the starry spirit back again, to the manifestation 
of that thing. Upon all which, the following Chapters do insist more 
largely and particularly. 
Of the Good and Evil Dsemons or Genii : Whither they are ; 
•what they are, and how they are manifested ; also of their 
names, powers, faculties, offices ; how they are to be considered. 
\ Ccording to the disposition of the mind, or soul, there 
is a good or evil Dcemon that accompanies the party 
visibly, or invisibly ; and these are of such rancks and 
orders, and names, as the capacity of the persons soul is, to whom 
they belong : Their Office is said to be, fore-warning the person 
of eminent danger, sometimes by inward instinct, sometimes by 
dreams in the night, and sometimes by appearing outwardly. The 
Dcemon or Genius changeth its nature and power, as the person 
Chap, II.

--- PAGE 595 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. ii. 497 
changeth his: and if from good, the party degenerate to iniquity; then 
by degrees the good Angel leaves him, and an evil DcEmon doth 
naturally succeed : for each thing draws after that which is like 
it self. 
2. Magicians mention three several wayes of enjoying the society Three ways of 
c 1 r, ^ ■ ^1-11 1 • • 1 enjoying their 
01 the Bonus Genms ; nrst by mtellectual association, when secret society. 
and mental instigations do arise in their hearts, to do this or that, and '^^^ first way. 
to forbear the other : as in the Manuscript of Na^ar the Indian., his 
own testimony of himself is to this effect : M)t, blessed Guardian 
I9amtl6ar, hath now so sweetly communicated himself imto me ; That 
by all the manifestations, whereby a holy Daemon can attend and co?i- 
verse with mankind, he appeareth unto me : first in the intellecttial 
way, he is ever present, and every moment prompts me, what to act, 
what to forbear from actifig; : Ah had he not rushed up through the 
powers of my soul, and suddenly warned me in my Travel to Quiansi 
in China, through the airy Region, to turn nimbly to the right hand, 
at an instant, a mighty Troop of Devils, whose Leader was (ffirari^nofft, 
coming through that tract of air, had crusht me into a thousand 
peices : This is the first degree of its appearing. 
3. Then he proceedeth in the language of Si7ia, describing the The second 
second way of its manifestation : And when the deepest sleep hath over- 
-poured me, I am never without him ; so?netimes my JBamtl^ar stands 
before 7ne like a glorious Virgin, administring to me a Cup of the 
drink of the Gods, which my Intellectual man exhausteth : sometimes 
he brifigs ccelestial Companies, and danceth round about me ; and 
when after the weariness of the Senses, through contemplation I fell 
into gentle sleep on the holy Mountain of Convocation, which is called 
Adan, he shewed me the motion of the Heavens, the nature of all things, 
a?id the power of every evil Dsemon. 
4. Thirdly, he continueth to describe the External appearance of The third way 
the Genius, to this effect : ISamilfear appears before me at my desire ; pearance.^ 
for my desires are as his desires : When I slept a long space in 7ny 
private dwelling, he appeared outwardly, and watering me with the 
dew of the fourth Heaven, I awakned, when he had thrise said |3lanfein 
JJagar ; so the time being come, we tnounted through the Air, unto the 
holy Mountain of Convocation. 
5. In this Example the three degrees of the Apparition of the Bonus Their number. 
Genitis, or Good Dcemon are excellently deciphered, which is also the 
same in the appearance of the bad Genius: and according to the 
deepest Magicians, there be seven good Angels, who do most frequently 
become particular Guardians, of all others, each to their respective 
capacities ; and also seven evil Daemons, that are most frequent in 
association with depraved persons, as Guardians to them./

--- PAGE 596 ---
498 
Book. II. A Discoiivse couceming 
The seven 43. 6. These are the seven _^<?(?(^ .(4 w^^-Zj, or Z?<r<?;;/f;/j. 
good Angels. Jubaillatacc a mighty Prince in the Dominion of Thrones, he cometh 
unto such as follow national affairs, and are carryed forth unto warr 
and conquest ; he beareth alwayes a flaming Sword, and is girded 
about, having a helmet upon his head, and appearing still before the 
party in the Air : he must be sollicited and invocated with Chastity, 
[»hisisMvC] Vows, Fumes, and Prayers : and this is his* Character to be worn as 
a Lamin. 
^a^=Ii-i3al) one of the Powers, accompanying such as are Virgins, 
and devoted to Religion, and a Hermits life : he teacheth all the 
names and powers of Angels, and gives holy Charms against the 
assaults of Evil DcEinons : he must be addrest unto by Prayer, 
resignation, and fasting, with a celestial Song out of the Canto's of 
Na_i^ar : this is his Character. 
^ahQah appearing to those that are devoted to the knowledge of 
Magick ; teaching them how to e.xercise Infernal Witchcraft without 
danger, and in despight to the Devils : he must be sought by hours, 
minutes, constellations, privacy and blood, dr'c. He hath a bow bent 
in his hand, and a Crown of Gold upon his head : this is his 
Character. 
/Bdjmom one of the Powers who hath the ability of subservient 
administration ; that is, at one time to be present with many ; he 
resembleth a Ew with Lamb, typifying his nature in that appear- 
ance.

--- PAGE 597 ---
Devils and Spirits. 
Chap. II. 
499 
<@aontin an Angel, causing his Pupil to go invisible, and transport- 
ing him at his pleasure in a moment, to the outmost parts of the 
earth. 
i^alanu the Instructer in Manual operations, by whom Bezaliah, 
and Aholibah were divinely inspired for the structre* of the 
Tabernacle. 
laaina-umi who is the Instructer in Cabalistical Magick, and 
reveals the secrets of numbers, the names of Angels, and the virtue 
of Boim. 
7. These are the seven bad Angels or Damons. 
As the power and capacity of the good, proceeds from the strength 
of God, in the quality of heaven ; so is the force of the evil Genii, in 
the hellish quality correspondent : for it is to be noted, that these 
evil Angels did before their fall, enjoy the same places and degrees 
that now the good or holy Angels do : so that as their power is to 
instruct men in Government, Abstinence, Philosophy, Magick, and 
Mechanick Arts, for a good intent, and for the glory of God : The 
power of the evilonfi is the very same to inform and instigate unto 
the same attainments, as farr as they may be instrumental for the 
Devil, or the Kingdom of Darkness therein. 
8. Their names are i. iJanalrarp, like a Crocodile with two heads. 
2. ISaratron appearing like a Conjurer in a Priestly habit. 3. ^on&en- 
naj like a Hunts-man. 4. ©rcijtnolial accompanying his Pupil like a 
Spaniel-Dog. 5. Callisargon the grand Inticer to theeving and robbery, 
till he hath brought his followers to destruction. 6. fHorborgran who 
can put on various likenesses, especially appearing as a Serving-man. 
7. ISarman who most commonly possesseth the soul of those that are 
joyned unto him./ 
9. These are the names of the 7 good and evil Damons ; according 
to the antient writing, on the Magical Art : who do also to many 
particular Cities and Countries, ascribe certain good and evil Angels ; 
the one whereof protects and defends, the other inflicts Pestilence and 
Famin upon them : Like unto which is the story recorded by Sigbertus 
in Chronicis : That in the 1 1'*' year of the reign of Constans, a good 
Angel and a bad "djere seen by tJie ivhole City of Constantinople, nightly 
to fly about the City ; and as oft eft as by the command of the good Angel, 
the other smote any house with a dart in his hand, such was the number 
that dyed in that house, according to the stroaks given. 
10. And indeed it is to be feared, that whosoever have ever 
pretended, or do at present alledge, that they enjoy familiarity with a 
familiar Spirit ; I say its greatly to be suspected, that all such 
familiars belong to the Kingdom of Darkness ; for such are too too 
officious, and ready to attend the depraved desires of mortal men ; 
The nature of 
both. 
The seven evil 
Genii, and the 
manner of 
their appea- 
rances. 
44. 
An example. 
The uncertain- 
ty of communi- 
caiing with 
Angels.

--- PAGE 598 ---
500 
Book II. 
A Discourse concerning' 
Familiars in 
the time of the 
Jews. 
Several men 
have wrote and 
methodized 
the Art of 
Conjuration. 
wliere.is if communication with Angels, or good and holy Guardians 
be at all attainable, yet such is the difficulty of the attainment, that 
the examples thereof, if true, are exceeding rare : But in general, the 
writings of Magicians and Naturallists do plentifully abound with 
examples of this nature ; whether good or evil, is yet to be determined. 
I have been told of a certain Country-man, in these dayes, who was 
continually pestered with the company of a woman, discerned by 
none but by himself : If he was upon Horse-back, she would be 
behind him : if at dinner, she sate at his elbow ; if lying on his bed, 
there she was also present ; And if at any time he had taken a 
journey, or gone about some unprofitable business, at such a time she 
accompanyed him not ; and seldom escaped he some mischief when 
she was absent : But at last, for all her dutiful pretences, as she 
accompanyed him, riding through a deep and swift running River, she 
tumbled him into the deepest part, and lay upon him till she had 
strangled or drowned him. 
11. Amongst the Jews^xs kind of Idolatry was frequent, to consult 
with and associate themselves unto familiar Spirits, whom they com- 
pelled to do them domestick service, dressing their Camels, lifting 
their burthens, and doing their messages : for the attaining their 
service they had many blasphemous Forms, and superstitious Cere- 
monies and Sacrifices ; making the holy Names of God subservient 
to their accursed practices : one whose name was 13aaI=liScn-ammin, 
was adjudged by the Law of Moses to be burnt for the like practices ; 
being condemned in the time of one Jtidah a high Priest in the 
Captivity for killing an Infant, and with its blood performing Sacrifice 
to Saalfeiiut, with various ceremonies intermixed ; by which means 
his God had bequeathed unto him a certain Lacky from the Infernal 
Troop to attend and serve him for his whole life time : this is to be 
found in Zoar's Coment upon Berostis, and Belus, who affirms, That 
at his tryal he endeavoured to prove, that the same was the good 
An^el or Genius given unto him by the mercy of God. 
12. Both the Hebrew Cabalists and Heathen Magicians, as also 
those addicted to Magick in Christianity, have all of them laid down 
certain forms of attaining the company of a good, or evil Angel, by 
number and astrological Observations, fitted to the rules of Conjura- 
tion and Invocations : And many of the superstitious Rabbi's have 
affirmed. That they were able by such practices, to cause the ghost of 
Adam, Eve, or any of the holy Patriarchs to appear unto thetn : which 
was surely the delusion of Satan to harden their hearts. But in the 
Addition to the is'^i Book of the Discovery this Subject is more 
practically handled ; where many forms of obtaining the Society of 
the Bonus, or Malus Genitcs, are plainly decyphered : so far as with 
safety and convenience they could be described./

--- PAGE 599 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. in. 501 
Chap. III. 45. 
Of the Astral Spirits of men departed : What they are : Aftd why 
they appear again : And what Witclicraft may be wroiight 
by them. 
A 
S the Astral Spirits separate, which belong not to any The spirits of 
deceased person, do for many years survive, or continue ; 
so if the party deceased hath departed in discontent, and 
melancholy, it is often known that they return again, and causing 
terrour to families and houses, do wait for opportunity to dis- 
burthen themselves, that at length they may come into their 
desired rest. 
2. The opinion of many is, That the Devill in their likenesse is all AU men have 
that appears : But the more Learned have sufficiently demonstrated, ^'^"^ ^' 
through Example, and Experience ; That the apparition is really 
ptoper to the person deceased. Nor can it easily be denyd, That to 
every man, and woman, while they live the natural Life, there belongs 
a Syderial, or starry Spirit ; which takes its original wholly from the 
Elemental property : And according to the weaker, or stronger 
capacity of the party, it hath the longer, or shorter continuance, after 
the bodyes decease. 
3. Such persons as are secretly murthered, and such as secretly What sort of 
murthur themselves, do most frequently appear again, and wander Fre'quentiy re- 
near the place where their Carcase is, till the radical moisture be totally ^pp^^''- 
consumed : according to the opinion of Paracelsus, after the con- 
sumption whereof, they can re-appear no longer, but are resolv'd into 
their first being, or Astrttm, after a certain term of months, or years, 
according to the vigour, or force of that first attraction which was the 
only cause of their returning. 
4. The manner and seasons of their appearing are various : Some- "^^f manner 
. ^ ° and time of 
times before the person, unto whom they do belong, depart this life, their appea- 
they do by external presentations forewarn him, near the time, that 
the day of death approacheth. As it is reported of Codriis Laanus, to 
whom an empty, meager Ghost appeared at midnight, signifying unto 
him, how sad and lachrymable a Tragedy was shortly to attend him ; 
and also adding, that he wotdd visit him in the Execution thereof : 
which proved not contrary to the words of the apparition ; for at the 
very instant, when his Treacherous Wife had stab'd him at the heart, 
on a suddain he beheld the same, with preparations for his interment, 
whilst he yet survived, after the fatall wound was given.

