iracles : yea hereby 
they can make what they list to be scripture ; as Valeria Proba did 
picke certeine verses out of Virgil alluding them to Christ. And 
therefore these their revolutions are nothing but allegoricall games, 
which idle men busied in letters, points, and numbers (which the 
Hebrew toong easilie suffereth) devise, to delude and cousen the 
simple and ignorant. And this they call Alphabetarie or Arythman- 
ticall divinitie, which Christ shewed to his apostles onelie, and which

--- PAGE 259 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 12. 161 
Paule saith he speaketh but among perfect men ; and being high 
mysteries are not to be committed unto writing, and so made 
popular. There is no man that readeth anie thing of / this Cabalis- 200. 
ticall art, but must needs think upon the popes cunning practises in 
this behalfe, who hath In scrinio pectoris, not onelie the exposition of in concii, 
all lawes, both divine and humane, but also authoritie to adde there- 
unto, or to drawe backe therefrom at his pleasure : and this may he 
lawfullie doo even with the scriptures, either by addition or substrac- 
tion, after his owne pontificall liking. As for example : he hath added 
the Apocrypha (whereunto he might as well have joined S. Aiigustines [C.of Trem 1550] 
works, or the course of the civill lawe, &c :) Againe, he hath dimin- 
ished from the decalog or ten commandements, not one or two words, 
but a whole precept, namelie the second, which it hath pleased him 
to dash out with his pen : and trulie he might as well by the same 
authoritie have rased out of the testament S. Markes gospell. 
The twelfe Chapter. 
When, how, and in what sort sacrifices were first ordained, and 
how they were prophaned, and how the pope corriipieth the 
sacraments of Christ. 
T the first God manifested to our father Adam, by the Gen. 2. 17. 
prohibition of the apple, that he would have man live 
under a lawe, in obedience and submission ; and 
not to wander like a beast without order or discip- 
line. And after man had transgressed, and deserved thereby Gods Gen. 3. 6. 
heavie displeasure ; yet his mercie prevailed ; and taking compassion Gen. 3. 15. 
upon man, he promised the Messias, who should be borne of a 
woman, and breake the serpents head : declaring by evident testi- 
monies, that his pleasure was that man should be restored to favour 
and grace, through Christ : and binding the minds of men to this 
promise, and to be fixed upon their Messias, established figures and 
ceremonies wherewith to nourish their faith, and confirmed the same 
with miracles, prohibiting and excluding all mans devises in that 
behalfe. And upon his promise renewed, he injoined (I say) and 3- 
erected a new forme of worship, whereby/ he would have his promises 146. 
constantlie beheld, faithfullie beleeved, and reverentlie regarded. He 
or/deined six sorts of divine sacrifices ; three propitiatorie, not as 201. 
meriting remission of sinnes, but as figures of Christs propitiation : 
the other three were of thanksgiving. These sacrifices were full of 
ceremonies, they were powdered with consecrated salt, and kindled 
Y

--- PAGE 260 ---
1 62 II. Booke. The discoverie 
with fier, which was preserved in the tabernacle of the Lord : which 
fier (some thinke) was sent downe from heaven. GOD himselfe 
commanded these rites and ceremonies to our forefathers, Noah, 
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, &c : promising therein both the amplifica- 
tion of their families, and also their Messias. But in tract of time 
(I saie) wantonnesse, negligence, and contempt, through the instiga- 
tion of the divell, abolished this institution of GOD : so as in the 
end, God himselfe was forgotten among them, and they became 
pagans & heathens, devising their owne waies, untill everie countrie 
had devised and erected both new sacrifices, and also new gods par- 
ticular unto themselves. Whose example the pope followeth, in 
A gird at prophaning of Christs sacraments, disguising them with his devises 
fo^his^saw- and superstitious ceremonies ; contriving and comprehending therein 
cinesse in jjjg follie of all nations : the which bicause little children doo now 
Oods mat- 
ters, perceive and scorne, I will passe over ; and returne to the Gentiles, 
whome I cannot excuse of cousenage, superstition, nor yet of vanitie 
in this behalfe. For if God suffered false prophets among the 
children of Israeli, being Gods peculiar people, and hypocrits in the 
church of Christ ; no marvell if there were such people amongst the 
heathen, which neither professed nor knew him. 
The xiii. Chapter. 
Plin. lib. n 
tural. hist. 
10. cap. 6. 
Of the objects ivhereiipon the ati^s^urors used to prognosticate, with 
certeine cautions and notes. 
HE Gentiles, which treat of this matter, repeat an 
innumerable multitude of objects, whereupon they prog- 
nosticate good or bad lucke. And a great matter is 
j made of neezing, wherein the number of neezings & the 
time therof is greatlie noted ; the tingling in the finger, the elbowe, 
202. the toe, the knee, &c : are sin'gular notes also to be observed in this 
art ; though speciallie heerin are marked the flieng of fowles, and 
meeting of beasts ; with this generall caution, that the object or 
matter whereon men divine, must be sudden and unlocked for : which 
regard, children and some old fooles have to the gathering primrose, 
true loves, and foure leaved grasse ; Item the person unto whome 
such an object offereth it selfe unawares ; Item the intention of the 
divinor, whereby the object which is met, is referred to augurie ; Item 
the houre in which the object is without foreknowledge upon the 
sudden met withall ; and so foorth. 
Plinie reporteth that griphes flie alwaies to the place of slaughter,

--- PAGE 261 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 14. 163 
two or three daies before the battell is fought ; which was scene and 
tried at the battell of Troie : and in respect thereof, the griph was 
allowed to/ be the cheefe bird of augurie. But among the innumer- 147. 
able number of the portentous beasts, fowles, serpents, and other gurlis"' 
creatures, the tode is the most excellent object, whose ouglie deformitie 
signifieth sweete and amiable fortune : in respect whereof some super- 
stitious witches preserve todes for their familiars. And some one of 
good credit (whome I could name) having convented the witches 
themselves, hath starved diverse of their divels, which they kept in 
boxes in the likenesse of todes. 
Plutarch Chirojiceus saith, that the place and site of the signes j^'j^^^^y 
that we receive by augurie, are speciallie to be noted : for if we his leave, 
receive them on the left side, good lucke ; if on the right side, ill [earning!^ 
lucke insueth : bicause terrene and mortall things are opposite & con- 
trarie to divine and heavenlie things ; for that which the gods 
deliver with the right hand, falleth to our left side ; and so contrari- 
wise. 
The xiiii. Chapter. 
The division of augurie, persons admittable itito the colleges 
of augurie, of their superstition. 
HE latter divinors in these mysteries, have divided their 
soothsaiengs into twelve superstitions : as Augustintts Aug. Niphus 
Niphiis termeth them. The first is prosperitie ; the 
second, ill lucke, as when one goeth/ out of his house, and 203. 
seeth an unluckie beast lieng on the right side of his waie ; the third 
is destinie ; the fourth is fortune ; the fift is ill hap, as when an in- 
fortunate beast feedeth on the right side of your waie ; the sixt is 
utilitie ; the seventh is hurt ; the eight is called a cautell, as when a 
beast followeth one, and staieth at any side, not passing beyond him, 
which is a signe of good lucke ; the ninth is infelicitie, and that is 
contrarie to the eight, as when the beast passeth before one ; the 
tenth is perfection ; the eleventh is imperfection ; the twelfe is con- 
clusiin.* Thus farre he. sion] 
Among the Romans none could be received into the college of who were 
augurors that had a bile, or had beene bitten with a dog, &c : and at ""yelnto' 
the times of their exercise, even at noone daies, they lighted candels. the college 
From whence the papists conveie unto their church, those points of among the 
infidelitie. Finallie, their observations were so infinite and ridiculous, ^o™^"^- 
that there flew not a sparkle out of the fier, but it betokened some- 
what.

--- PAGE 262 ---
1 64 n. Booke. The discoverie 
The XV. Chapter. 
O vaine 
follie and 
foolish va- 
nitie I 
148, 
[" read, witch — ] 
V^rcad, — kie] 
[* read, his] 
Martin, de ^q. 
Arks in ^ 
tract, de 
pcrst. contra 
malcficta* 
At't'ian. de 
bello civili. 
[* read, — /icia.'\ 
Augurifi- 
call toits. 
0/ the common peoples fond and superstitious collections and 
observations. 
MONGST us there be manie women, and effeminat men 
(marie papists alwaies, as by their superstition may 
appeere) that make great divinations upon the shedding 
of salt, wine, &c : and for the observation of daies, and 
houres use as great *withcraft as in anie thing. For if one/ chance to 
take a fall from a horsse, either in a slipperie or stumbling waie, he will 
note the dale and houre, and count that time unluckch* for a journie. 
Otherwise, he that receiveth a mischance, wil consider whether he 
met not a cat, or a hare, when he went first out of hfr* doores in the 
morning ; or stumbled not at the threshhold at his going out ; or put 
not on his shirt the wrong side outwards ; or his left shoo on his 
right foote, which Atigusties Ccesar reputed for the woorst lucke that 
mii;ht befall. But above all other nations (as Martimcs de Aries 
wit/nesseth) the Spajtiards are most superstitious herein ; & of 
Spaine, the people of the province of Ltcsitania is the most fond. 
For one will sale ; I had a dreame to night, or a crowe croked upon 
my house, or an owle flew by me and screeched (which augurie 
Lucius Silla tooke of his death) or a cocke crew contrarie to his 
houre. Another saith ; The moone is at the prime ; another, that the 
sun rose in a cloud and looked pale, or a starre shot and shined in 
the aire, or a strange cat came into the house, or a hen fell from the 
top of the house. 
Many will go to bed againe, if they neeze before their shooes be on 
their feet ; some will hold fast their left thombe in their right hand 
when they hickot ; or else will hold their chinne with their right hand 
whiles a gospell is soong. It is thought verie ill lucke of some, that 
a child, or anie other living creature, should passe betweene two 
friends as they walke togither ; for they say it portendeth a division 
of freendship. Among the papists themselves, if any hunters, as they 
were a hunting, chanced to meet a frier or a preest ; they thought it 
so ill lucke, as they would couple up their hounds, and go home, 
being in despaire of any further sport that daie. Marrie if they had 
used venerie with abegger, they should win all the monie they plaied 
for that daie at dice. The like follie is to be imputed unto them, that 
observe (as true or probable) old verses, wherein can be no reasonable 
cause of such effects ; which are brought to passe onlie by Gods 
power, and at his pleasure. Of this sort be these that follow :

--- PAGE 263 ---
of Witchcraft, 
Chap. 1 6. 
Vincenti festo si sol radiet memor esio, 
Femeinber on S. Vincents daie, 
If that the sunne his beames displaie. 
Clara dies Pauli bona tenipora denotat anni, 
If Paule tK apostles daie be cleare, 
It dooth foreshew a luckie yeare. 
Si sol splendescat Maria purifcante, 
Major erit glacies post festum quain fuit ante, II 
If Maries pur ifieng daie. 
Be cleare and bright with sunnie raie, 
Then frost and cold shalbe much more. 
After the feast than was before. 
Serb rubens ccelum eras indicat esse seremcm, 
Si man^ rubescit, ventus vel pluvia crescit. 
The skie being red at evening, 
Foreshewes a faire and cleare morning; 
But if the morning riseth red, 
Of wind or raine we shalbe sped. 
Some sticke a needle or a buckle into a certeine tree, neere to the 
cathedrall church of S. Christopher, or of some other saint ; hoping 
thereby to be delivered that yeare from the headach. Item maids 
forsooth hang some of their haire before the image of S. Urbajte, 
bicause they would have the rest of their haire grow long and be 
yellow. Item, women with child runne to church, and tie their girdles 
or shoo latchets about a bell, and strike upon the same thrise, think- 
ing that the sound thereof hasteth their good deliverie. But sithence 
these things beginne to touch the vanities and superstitions of incan- 
tations, I will referre you thither, where you shall see of that stuffe 
abundance ; beginning at the word Habar. 
Englished by 
Abraham 
Fleming, 
By Ab. Fle- 
ming. 
149. 
By Ab. Fle- 
ming. 
By Ab. Fle- 
ming. 
Seeke more 
hereof in 
the word 
Habar, 
The xvi. Chapter. 
How old writers varie about the matter, the maner and the meanes, 
whereby things aitgurificall are mooved, 
HEOPHRASTUS and Thetnistius affirme, that whatso- 
ever happeneth unto man suddenlie and by chance, 
commeth from the providence of God. So as Thejnistius 
gathereth, that men in that respect/ prophesie, when they 206. 
speake what commeth in their braine, upon the sudden ; though not 
knowing or understanding what they sale. And that seeing God hath

--- PAGE 264 ---
II Booke. 
The discoverie 
Averrots. 12. 
metaphysic. 
a care for us, it agreeth with reason (as Theophrastiis saith) that he 
shew us by some meane whatsoever shall happen. For with Pytha- 
goras he concludeth, that all foreshewes and auguries are the voices 
and words of God, by the which he foretelleth man the good or evill 
that shall beetide. 
Trisniegistics affirmeth, that all augurificall things are mooved by 
divels ; Porphyrie saith by gods, or rather good angels : according to 
the opinion of Plotiiius and lamblichus. Some other affirme they 
are mooved by the moone wandering through the twelve signes of 
the Zodiake : bicause the moone hath dominion in all sudden 
matters. The Aegyptian astronomers hold, that the moone order- 
eth not those portentous matters, but Stella errans, a wandering 
starre, &c./ 
The fond 
art of augu- 
rie convin- 
ced. 
Acts. I, 7. 
Arist. de 
somno. 
150. The xvii. Chapter. 
How ridiadous an art aiigurie is, how Cato mocked it, Aristotles 
reason against it, fond collectio7ts of augiirors, who allowed, and 
who disallowed it. 
ERELIE all these observations being neither grounded 
on Gods word, nor physicall or philosophicall reason, are 
vanities, superstitions, lies, and meere witchcraft ; as 
whereby the world hath long time beene, and is still 
abused and cousened. It is written ; Non est vestrum scire tempora 
moinenta, Sr'c : It is not for you to knowe the times and seasons, 
which the father hath put in his owne power. The most godlie men 
and the wisest philosophers have given no credit hereunto. S. 
Augtistine saith ; Qui his divinationibus credit, sciat se fidetn christi- 
anatn &^ baptismum prcEvaricasse, paganum Deiq; inimiciim esse. 
One told Cato, that a rat had carried awaie and eaten his hose, which 
the partie said was a woonderfull signe. Naie (said Cato) I thinke not 
so ; but if the hose had eaten the rat, that had beene a wonderfull 
20"/. token indeed. When/ Nonius told Cicero that they should have good 
successe in battell, bicause seven eagles were taken in Pompeies 
campe, he answered thus ; No doubt it will be even so, if that we 
chance to fight with pies. In the like case also he ans-w^rtd Labienus, 
who prophesied like successe by such divinations, saieng, that 
through the hope of such toies, Pompeie lost all his pavillions not long 
before. 
What wiseman would thinke, that God would commit his counsell 
to a dawe, an owle, a swine, or a tode ; or that he would hide his 
secret purposes in the doong and bowels of beasts ? Aristotle thus 
reasoneth ; Augurie or divinations are neither the causes nor effects

--- PAGE 265 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 1 8. 
of things to come ; Ergo, they doo not thereby foretell things trulie, 
but by chance. As if I dreame that my freend will come to my 
house, and he commeth indeed : yet neither dreame nor imagination 
is more the cause of my freends comming, than the chattering of 
a pie. 
When Hanibal overthrew Marcus Marcelh(s, the beast sacrificed 
wanted a peece of his hart ; therefore forsooth Marhes, when he 
sacrificed at Utica, and the beast lacked his liver, he must needs have 
the like successe. These are their collections, and as vaine, as if 
they said that the building of Tenderden steeple was the cause of 
Goodwi?ie satids, or the decaie of Sandwich haven. .S. Augustine 
saith, that these observations are most superstitious. But we read in 
the fourth psalme, a sentence which might dissuade anie christian 
from this foUie and impietie ; O ye sonnes of men, how long will you 
turne my glorie into shame, loving vanitie, and seeking lies.'' The 
like is read in manie other places of scripture. 
Of such as allow this follie, I can commend Plinie best, who saith, 
that the operation of these auguries is as we take them. For if we 
take them in good part, they are signes of good lucke ; if we take 
them in ill part, ill lucke/ followeth ; if we neglect them, and wey 
them not, they doo neither good nor harme. Thomas of Aquine 
reasoneth in this wise ; The starres, whose course is certeine, have 
greater affinitie and communitie with mans actions, than auguries ; 
and yet our dooings are neither directed nor proceed from the starres. 
Which thing also Ptolome witnesseth, saieng ; Sapiens dominabitur 
astris, A wiseman overruleth the starres./ 
The 18. Chapter. 
Fond distinctions of the heathen writers, concerning augurie. 
HE heathen made a distinction betweene divine, naturall, 
and casuall auguries. Divine auguries were such, as 
men were made beleeve were done miraculouslie, as 
when dogs spake ; as at the expulsion of Tarquittius out 
of his kingdome ; or when trees spake, as before the death of Ccesar ; 
or when horsses spake, as did a horsse, whose name was Zanthus. 
Manie learned christians confesse, that such things as may indeed 
have divine cause, may be called divine auguries ; or rather fore- 
warnings of God, and tokens either of his blessings or discontentation : 
as the starre was a token of a safe passage to the magicians that 
sought Christ ; so was the cockcrowing an augurie to Peter for his 
conversion. And manie such other divinations or auguries (if it be 
lawfull so to terme them) are in the scriptures to be found. 
August, lib. 
de doct. chri. 
7. cap. 2. 
Psal. 4, 2. 
Plin. lib. na- 
tural, hist. 
28. cap. 2. 
Tko Aquin. 
lib. de sortib. 
151. 
208 
C. Epidius. 
Homer. Ili- 
ad. 19.

--- PAGE 266 ---
II. Booke. 
The discoverie 
The 19. Chapter. 
Of naiurall and casuall augurie, the one allowed, and the other 
disallowed. 
ATURALL augurie is a physicall or philosophical! obser- 
vation ; bicause humane and naturall reason may be 
yeelded for such events : as if one heare the cocke crow 
manie times together, a man may ghesse that raine will 
followe shortlie ; as by the crieng of rooks, and by their extraordi- 
narie using of their wings in their flight, bicause through a naturall 
instinct, provoked by the impression of the heavenlie bodies, they 
2og. are mooved to know the/ times, according to the disposition of the 
weather, as it is necessarie for their natures. And therefore Jeremie 
saith ; Milvus in ccelo cognovit tempus simm. The physician may 
argue a strength towards in his patient, when he heareth him neeze 
twise, which is a naturall cause to judge by, and conjecture upon. 
But sure it is meere casuall, and alsoverie foolish and incredible, that 
by two neezings, a man should be sure of good lucke or successe in 
his businesse ; or by meeting of a tode, a man should escape a 
danger, or atchieve an enterprise, &c./ 
152. 
The vani- 
tie of casu- 
all augurie. 
The XX. Chapter. 
A confutation of casuall augurie which is meere witchcraft, and upon 
what uncertaintie those divinations are grounded. 
i) 
ilHAT imagination worketh in man or woman, many 
leaves would not comprehend ; for as the qualities 
thereof are strange, and almost incredible, so would the 
discourse thereof be long and tedious, wherof I had 
occasion to speake elsewhere. But the power of our imagination 
extendeth not to beasts, nor reacheth to birds, and therefore perteineth 
not hereunto. Neither can the chance for the right or left side be 
good or bad lucke in it selfe. Why should any occurrent or augurie 
be good 
Bicause it commeth out of that part of the heavens, where 
the good or beneficiall stars are placed 1 By that reason, all things 
should be good and happie that live on that side ; but we see the 
contrarie experience, and as commonlie as that. 
The like absurditie and error is in them that credit those divina- 
tions ; bicause the starres, over the ninth house have dominion at the 
time of augurie. If it should betoken good lucke, joy or gladnesse, to 
heare a noise in the house, when the moone is in Aries : and contrari-

--- PAGE 267 ---
of IVitchcraft. cimp. 21. 169 
wise, if it be a signe of ill lucke, sorrovve, or greefe for a beast to 
come into the house, the moone being in the same signe : here might 
be found a fowie error and contrarietie./ And forsomuch as both 310. 
may happen at once, the rule must needs be false and ridiculous. 
And if there were any certeine rules or notes to be gathered in these 
divinations ; the abuse therein is such, as the word of God must needs 
be verefied therein ; to wit, I will destroie the tokens of soothsaiers, isai. 44. 25. 
and make them that conjecture, fooles. 
The xxi. Chapter. 
That figure-casters are witches, the uncertehitie of their art, and of 
their contradictions, Cornelius Agrippas sentence against judiciall 
astrologie. 
HESE casters of figures may bee numbred among the 
cousening witches, whose practise is above their reach, 
their purpose to gaine, their knowledge stolne from poets, 
their art uncerteine & full of vanitie, more plainly derided 
in the scriptures, than any other follie. And thereupon many other 
trifling vanities are rooted and grounded ; as physiognomie, palmes- 
trie, interpreting of dreames, monsters, auguries, &c : the professors 
whereof confesse this to be the necessarie key to open the knowledge of 
all their secrets. For these fellowes erect a figure of the heavens, bj 
the exposition whereof (togither with the conjectuVes of similitudes 
and signes) they seeke to find out the meaning of the significators, 
attributing to them the ends of all things, contrarie to truth, reason, 
and divinitie : their rules being so inconstant, that few writers agree 
in/ the verie prmciples therof. For the Rabbins, the old and new 
writers, and the verie best philosophers dissent in the cheefe grounds 
thereof, differing in the proprietie of the houses, whereout they wring 
the foretelling of things to come, contending even about the number 
of spheres, being not yet resolved how to erect the beginnings and 
endes of the houses : for Ptolomie maketh them after one sort, Cam- 
pamts after another, &c. ^ 
And as Alpetragus thinketh, that there be in the heavens / 
diverse movings as yet to men unknowne, so doo others affirme (not 
without probabilitie) that there male be starres and bodies, to whome 
these movings male accord, which cannot be seene, either through 
their exceeding highnes, or that hitherto are not tried with anie obser- 
vation of the art. The true motion of Mars is not yet perceived, 
neither is it possible to find out the true entring of the sunne into 
the equinoctiall points. It is not denied, that the astronomers them- 
Z 
The vnine 
and trifling 
trickes of 
figure -ca- 
sters. 
163. 
211. 
Johan. Mon- 
tiregius hi 
epistola ad 
Blanchnne :

