o crie out ; Dreames, dreames ; We have dreamed a 
dreame, &c. Finallie, Nabuchadjiez-zar teacheth all men to knowe a 
true expositor of dreames ; to wit, such a one as hath his 
revelation from GOD. For he can (as Daniel did) 
repeate your dreame before you discover it : 
which thing if anie expounder of 
dreames can doo at 
this daie, I will 
beleeve 
him.// 
Isai. 6. 
Ezech. I J. 
Jerem. 13. 
J. Bodin. 
lib. de dx- 
vion. I. cap. 5. 
188. 
Zach. 10, 2. 
Eccles. 5, 6. 
Jerem. 23. 
Daniel. J.

--- PAGE 250 ---
152 
II. Booke. 
The discoverie 
The slo- 
venlie art 
of augurie. 
'^9- 138. ^[ The eleventh booke. 
The first Chapter. 
The Hebrue word Nahas expoiended, of the art of attgurie, who 
invented it, how slovenlie a science it is : the multitude of sacri- 
fices and sacrificers of the heathe^t, and the causes therof. 
AH AS, is To observe the flieng of birds, & comprehendeth 
all such other observations, where men do ghesse upon 
uncerteine toies. It is found in Deut. i8. and in 2. 
Chron. 33. and else-where. Of this art of augurie Tyresias 
the king of the Thebans is said to be the first inventor : but Tages 
first published the discipline thereof, being but a little boie ; as Cicero 
reporteth out of the bookes of the Hetruscans themselves. Some 
points of this art are more high and profound than some others, and 
yet are they more homelie and slovenlie than the rest ; as namelie, 
the divination upon the entrailes of beasts, which the Gentiles in 
their sacrifices speciallie observed. Insomuch as Marcus Varro, 
seeing the absurditie thereof, said that these gods were not onHe idle, 
but verie slovens, that used so to hide their secrets and counsels in 
the guts and bowels of beasts. 
How vainlie, absurdlie, and superstitiouslie the heathen used this 
kind of divination in their sacrifices, is manifested by their actions 
& ceremonies in that behalfe practised, as well in times past, as at 
this houre. The Aegyptians had 666. several! sorts and kinds of 
iQO. sacrifices ; the Romans had almost as manie ; the Grce\cians had not 
so few as they ; the Persians and the Medes were not behind them ; 
the Itidies and other nations have at this instant their sacrifices full 
of varietie, and more full of barbarous impietie. For in sundrie 
places, these offer sacrifices to the divell, hoping thereby to moove 
him to lenitie : yea, these commonlie sacrifice such of 
their enimies, as they have taken in warre ; as 
we read that the Gentiles in ancient time 
did offer sacrifice, to appease the 
wrath and indignation of 
their feigned 
ETods.

--- PAGE 251 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 3. 
I. Re. «3, 10 
J. Chr. 33. 
Jerem. 7. 
The .second Chapter. 
Of the Jewes sacrifice to Moloch, a discourse thereupon, and 0/ 
Purgatorie. 
HE Jewes used one kind of diabolical sacrifice, never 
taught them by Moses, namelie, to offer their children to 
Moloch, making their sonnes and their daughters to runne 
through the fire ; supposing such grace and efficacie to 
have beene in that action, as other witches affirme to be in charmes 
and words. And therfore among other points of witchcraft, this is pgut. 18, 10 
speciallie and namelie forbidden by Moses. We read of no more 
' Id. cap. 30. 2. 
miracles wrought hereby, than by any other kmd of witchcraft m the 
old or new testament expressed. It was no ceremonie appointed by 
God,/ no figure of Christ : perhaps it might be a sacrament or rather 
a figure of purgatorie, the which place was not remembred by Moses, gainst pur 
Neither was there anie sacrifice appointed by the lawe for the releefe 
of the Israelites soules that there should be tormented. Which with- 
out all doubt should not have beene omitted, if any such place of 
purgatorie had beene then, as the Pope hath latelie devised for his 
private and speciall lucre. This sacrificing to Moloch (as some 
affirme) was usuall among the Gentiles, from whence the Jewes 
brought it into Israel : and there (of likeliehood) the Eutichists learned 
the abhomination in that behalfe./ 
An invin- 
cible argu- 
ment a- 
13! 
The third Chapter. igi. 
The Caiiibals crueliie, of popish sacrifices exceeding in tyrannie the 
Jewes or Gentiles. 
HE incivilitie and cruell sacrifices of popish preests do 
yet exceed both the Jew and the Gentile : for these take 
upon them to sacrifice Christ himselfe. And to make 
their tyrannie the more apparent, they are not contented 
to have killed him once, but dailie and hourelie torment him with 
new deaths ; yea they are not ashamed to sweare, that with their 
carnall hands theyteare his humane substanse, breaking it into small 
gobbets ; and with their externall teeth chew his flesh and bones, 
contrarie to divine or humane nature ; and contrarie to the prophesie, 
which saith ; There shall not a bone of him. be broken. Finallie, in Psai. 34, to. 
the end of their sacrifice (as they say) they eate him up rawe, and 
swallow downe into their guts everie member and parcell of him : 
X 
Against the 
papists ab- 
hominable 
and blas- 
phemous 
sacrifice of 
the masse.

--- PAGE 252 ---
154 i>. Booke. TJie discoverie 
and last of all, that they conveie him into the place where they 
bestowe the residue of all that which they have devoured that daie. 
And this same barbarous impietie exceedeth the crueltie of all others: 
for all the Gentiles consumed their sacrifices with fier, which they 
thought to be holie. 
xgs. 
140. 
* The Gym- 
nosophists 
of India 
their apish 
imitation 
of Esaie. 
The fourth Chapter. 
The superstition of the heathen about the element of fier, and how it 
grew in such reveretice among them, of their corruptions, and 
that they had some inkling of the godlie fathers dooings in that 
behalfe. 
S touching the element of fier, & the superstition therof 
about those businesses, you shall understand, that manie 
superstitious people and nations have received, reverenced, 
& reserved fier, as the most holy thing among their sacri- 
fices: insomuch (I saie) as they have worshipped it a/mong their 
gods, calling it Orimasda (to wit) holie fier, and divine light. The 
Greekes called it ealav, the Romans Vesta, which is, The fier of the 
Lord. Surelie they had heard of the fier that came downe from 
heaven, and consumed the oblations of the fathers ; and they under- 
stood it to be God himselfe. For there came to the heathen, the 
bare names of things, from the doctrine of the godlie fathers and 
patriarchs, and those so ob/scured with fables, and corrupted with 
lies, so overwhelmed with superstitions, and disguised with ceremonies, 
that it is hard to judge from whence they came. Some cause thereof 
(I suppose) was partlie the translations of governements, whereby 
one nation learned follie of another ; and partlie blind devotion, 
without knowledge of Gods word : but speciallie the want of grace, 
which they sought not for, according to Gods commandement and 
will. And that the Gentiles had some inkling of the godlie fathers 
dooings, may diverslie appeare. Doo not the Muscovits and ^Indian 
prophets at this daie, like apes, imitate Esaief Bicause he went 
naked certeine yeares, they forsooth counterfet madnes, and 
drinke potions for that purpose ; thinking that what- 
soever they saie in their madnes, will cer- 
teinelie.come to passe. But hereof 
is more largelie discoursed 
before in the word 
Kasaiii.

--- PAGE 253 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 5. 155 
The fift Chapter. 
Of the Romane sacrifices : of the estimation they had of augurie, of 
the lawe of the twelve tables. 
jHE Romans, even after they were growne to great 
civilitie, and enjoied a most flourishing state and com- 
monwealth, would sometimes sacrifice themselves, some- 
times their children, sometimes their friends, &c : consum- 
ing the same with fier, which they thought holie. Such estimation 
(I saie) was attributed to this art of divination upon the entrails of 
beasts, &c : at Rome, as the cheefe princes themselves exercised the 
same ; namelie,/ Romiihis, Fabius Maximtis, &^c : in so much as igj. 
there was a decree made there, by the whole senate, that six of the 
cheefe magistrals sonnes should from time to time be put foorth, to 
learne the mysterie of these arts of augurie and divination, at Hetru- 
ria, where the cunning and knowledge thereof most abounded. 
When they came home well informed and instructed in this art, their 
estimation and dignitie was such, as they were accounted, reputed, 
and taken to be the interpreters of the gods, or rather betweene the 
gods and them. No high preest, nor anie other great officer was 
elected, but these did either absolutelie nominate them, or else did 
exhibit the names of two, whereof the senate must choose the one. 
In their ancient lawes were written these vyords : Prodigia The lawe 
portenta ad Hetruscos ariispices {si senatits jusserit) deferunto, f^ehfe 
Hetruriceqj principes discipliiiam disctmto. Qitibus divis decreveritnt, tables. 
procuranto, iisdem fulgttra &^ ostenta pianto, auspicia servanto, 
aiigiiri parento : the effect of which words is this ; Let all prodigious 
and portentous matters be carried to the soothsaiers of Heti tiria, 
at the will and commandement of the senat ; and let the yoong 
princes be sent to Hetrnria, there to learne that discipline, or to be 
instructed in that art and knowledge. Let there be alvvaies some 
solicitor, to learne with what gods they have decreed or determined 
their matters, and let sacrifices be made unto them in times 
of lightening, or at anie strange or supernaturall 
shew. Let all such conjecturing tokens be 
observed ; whatsoever the sooth- 
saier commandeth, let it 
be religicuslie 
obeied./

--- PAGE 254 ---
156 
I. Booke. 
The dhcovej-ie 
141. 
The sixt Chapter. 
Magna 
chart a. Hen, 
%. 36. 7 Ed. I. 
15. Ri. 2. 5. 
A manifest 
discoverie 
of augurors 
cousenage. 
Colleges of augurors., their office, their number, the signification of 
atigurie, that the praciisers of that art were couseners, their 
profession, their places of exercise, their apparrell, their supersti- 
tiott. 
lOMULUS erected three colleges or centuries of those 
kinds of soothsaiers, which onelie (and none other) should 
have authoritie to expound the minds and admonish- 
ments of the gods. Afterwards that/ number was aug- 
mented to five, and after that to nine : for they must needs be od. 
In the end, they increased so fast, that they were feine to make a 
decree for staie from the further proceeding in those erections : like 
to our statute of Mortmaitie. Hovvbeit, Silla (contrarie to all orders 
and constitutions before made) increased that number to foure and 
twentie. 
And though Augurium be most properlie that divination, which is 
gathered by birds ; yet bicause this word Nahas comprehendeth all 
other kinds of divination, as Extispicitem, aruspicium, &'c : which is 
as well the ghessing upon the entrailes of beasts, as divers other 
waies : omitting physiognomic and palmestrie, and such like, for the 
tediousnes and follie thereof ; I will speake a little of such arts, as 
were above measure regarded of our elders : neither mind 1 to dis- 
cover the whole circumstance, but to refute the vanitie thereof, and 
speciallie of the professors of them, which are and alwaies have beene 
cousening arts, and in them conteined both speciall and severall 
kinds of witchcrafts. For the maisters of these faculties have ever 
taken upon them to occupie the place and name of God ; blasphem- 
ouslie ascribing unto themselves his omnipotent power, to foretell, &c : 
whereas, in truth, they could or can doo nothing, but make a shew of 
that which is not. 
One matter, to bewraie their cousening, is ; that they could never 
worke nor foreshew anie thing to the poore or inferior sort of people : 
for portentous shewes (saie they) alwaies concerned great estates. 
Such matters as touched the baser sort, were inferior causes ; 
which the superstition of the people themselves would not neglect 
to learne. Howbeit, the professors of this art descended not so 
lowe, as to communicate with them : for they were preests (which in 
all ages and nations have beene jollie fellowes) whose office was, to 
tell what should come to passe, either touching good lucke, or bad 
fortune ; to e.\pound the minds, admonitions, warnings and threat-

--- PAGE 255 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 8. 
nings of the gods, to foreshew calamities, &c : which might be (by 
their sacrifices and common contrition) remooved andquahfied. And 
before their entrance into that action, they had manie observations, 
which they executed verie superstitioushe ; pretending that everie 
bird and beast, &c, should be sent from the gods as foreshewes of 
somewhat. And/ therefore first they used to choose a cleare daie, and 
faire wether to doo their busines in : for the which their place was 
certeinelie assigned, as well in Rome as in Hetriiria, wherein they 
observed everie quarter of the element, which waie to looke, and 
which way to stand, &c.' Their apparell was verie preestlike, of 143. 
fashion altered from all others, speciallie at the time of their praiers, 
wherein they might not omit a word nor a syllable : in respect 
whereof one read the service, and all the residue repeated it after 
him, in the maner of a procession. 
The seventh Chapter. 
The times and seasons to exercise augurie, the maner and order 
thereof, of the ceremonies thereunto belottging. 
O lesse regard was there had of the times of their practise 
in that ministerie : for they must beginne at midnight, 
and end at noone, not travelling therein in the decaie of 
the day, but in the increase of the same ; neither in the 
sixt or seventh houre of the daie, nor yet after the moneth of August; 
bicause then yoong birds flie about, and are diseased, and unperfect, 
mounting their fethers, and flieng out of the countrie : so as no 
certeine ghesse is to be made of the gods purposes by them at those 
seasons. But in their due times they standing with a bowed wand in 
their hand, their face toward the east, &c : in the top of an high 
tower, the weather being cleare, watch for birds, noting from whence 
they came, and whether they flie, and in what sort they wag their 
wings, &c./ 
The eight Chapter. 
Note the 
superstiti- 
ous cere- 
monies of 
augurors. 
ig6. 
Upon what signes and tokens augurors did prognosticate, obser- 
vations touching the inward and outward parts of beasts, with 
notes of beasts behaviour in the slaughterhouse. 
HESE kind of witches, whom we have now in hand, did 
also prognosticate good or bad lucke, according to the 
soundnes or imperfection of the entrailes of beasts ; or 
according to the superfluities or infirmities of nature ; or 
according to the abundance of humors unnecessarie, appearing in 
the inward parts and bowels of the beasts sacrificed. For as touch-

--- PAGE 256 ---
II. Booke. 
The discoverie 
ing the outward parts, it was alwaies provided and foreseene, that 
Observati- they should be without blemish. And yet there were manie tokens 
art^aug'uri- ^nd notes to be taken of the externall actions of those beasts, at the 
time of sacrifice : as if they would not quietlie be brought to the 
place of execution, but must be forceablie hailed ; or if they brake 
loose ; or if by hap, cunning, or strength they withstood the first 
blowe ; or if after the butchers blowe, they leaped up, rored, stood 
fast ; or being fallen, kicked, or would not quietlie die, or bled not 
well; or if anie ill newes had beene heard, or anie ill sight seene at 
the time of slaughter or sacrifice : which were all significations of ill 
lucke and unhappie successe. On the other side, if the slaughterman 
performed his office well, so as the beast had beene well chosen, not 
infected, but whole and sound, and in the end faire killed ; all had 
beene safe : for then the gods smiled./ 
143 
The ninth Chapter. 
197- 
Plato in 
Phcedro, in 
Timeo, in 
lib. de Re- 
publ. 
Wherein 
the papists 
are more 
blame wor- 
thie than 
the hea- 
then. 
A confutation ofaugurie, Plato his reverend opinion thereof, of 
contrarie events, and false predictions. 
UT what credit is to be attributed to such toies and 
chances, which grow not of nature, but are gathered by 
the superstition of the interpretors? As for birds, who is 
so ignorant that conceiveth not, that/ one flieth one waie, 
another another waie, about their privat necessities? And yet are the 
other divinations more vaine and foolish. Howbeit, Plato thinketh 
a commonwealth cannot stand without this art, and numbereth it 
among the liberall sciences. These fellowes promised Pompeie, 
Cassiiis, and Ccesar, that none of them should die before they were 
old, and that in their owne houses, and in great honor ; and yet they 
all died cleane contrarilie. Howbeit doubtles, the heathen in this 
point were not so much to be blamed, as the sacrificing papists : for 
they were directed hereimto without the knowledge of Gods promises ; 
neither knew they the end why such ceremonies and sacrifices were 
instituted ; but onelie understood by an uncerteine and slender re- 
port, that God was woont to send good or ill successe to the children 
of Israeli, and to the old patriarchs and fathers, upon his acceptance 
or disallowance of their sacrifices and oblations. But men in all ages 
have beene so desirous to know the effect of their purposes, the 
sequele of things to come, and to see the end of their feare and 
hope ; that a seelie witch, which had learned anie thing in the art of 
cousenage, may make a great manie jollie fooles.

--- PAGE 257 ---
of Witchc7'aft. 
Chap. 10. 
The tenth Chapter. 
The cousening art of sortilege or lotarie, practised especiallie by Aegyp- 
tian vagabonds, of allowed lots, of Pythagoras his lot, 
}HE counterfeit Aegyptians, which were indeed cousening 
vagabonds, practising the art called Sortilegitan, had no 
small credit among the multitude : howbeit, their divi- 
 nations were as was their fast and loose, and as the 
witches cures and hurtes, & as the soothsaiers answers, and as the 
conjurors raisings up of spirits, and as Apollos or the Rood of graces 
oracles, and as the jugglers knacks of legierdemaine, and as the 
papists exorcismes, and as the witches charmes, and as the counter- 
feit visions, and as the couseners knaveries. Hereupon it was said ; 
Non itivelniatur inter vos menahas, that is Sortilegus, which were like 
to these Aegyptian couseners. As for other lots, they were used, and 
that lawfuUie ; as appeareth by fonasz.r\d others that were holie men, 
and as may be seene among all commonwelths, for the deciding of 
diverse controversies, &c : wherein thy neighbour is not misused, nor 
God anie waie offended. But in truth I thinke, bicause of the cou- 
senage that so easilie may be used herein,/ God forbad it in the 
commonwealth of the Jewes, though in the good use thereof it was 
allowed in matters of great weight ; as appeareth both in the old and 
new testament ; and that as well in doubtfuU cases and distributions, 
as in elections and inheritances, and pacification of variances. I omit 
to speake anie thing of the lots comprised in verses, concerning the 
lucke ensuing, either of Virgil, Homer, or anie other, wherein fortune 
is gathered by the sudden turning unto them : bicause it is a childish 
and ridiculous toie, and like unto childrens plaie at Primus secundus, 
or the game called The philosophers table : but herein I will referre 
you to the bable it selfe, or else to Bodin, or to some such sober writer 
thereupon; of whome there is no want. 
There is a lot also called Pythagoras lot, which (some sale) Ari- 
stotle beleeved : and that is, where the characters of letters have 
certeine proper numbers ; whereby they divine (through the proper 
names of men) so as the numbers of each letters being gathered in 
a summe, and put togither, give victorie to them whose summe is 
the greater ; whether the question be of warre, life, matri- 
monie, victorie, &c : even as the unequall number of 
vowels in proper names portendeth lacke of sight, 
halting, &c : which the godfathers and god- 
mothers might easilie prevent, if the 
case stood so. 
Sortilege 
or lotshare. 
ig8. 
144. 
Levit. 16. 
Num. 33. 
& 36. 
Josu. 14. 
I. Chron. 24 
& 26. 
Prover. 18. 
Jonas. I. 
Acts. I. 
Of Pytha- 
goras lot.

--- PAGE 258 ---
i6o 
n Bcoke. 
The discoverie 
The art 
Cabalisti- 
call divi- 
ded. 
C. Agrippa 
lib. de vanit. 
scient. 
The blas- 
phemie of 
the Caba- 
lists. 
The eleventh Chapter. 
0/ the Cabalisticall art, consisting of traditions and unwritten veri- 
ties learned without booke, and of the division thereof. 
I ERE is place also for the Cabalisticall art, consisting 
of unwritten verities, which the Jewes doo beleeve and 
brag that God himselfe gave to Moses in the mount 
igg. !pn£3iite5.J|| Sinai ; and afterwards was taught/ onelie with livelie 
voice, by degrees of succession, without writing, untill the time 
of Esdras : even as the scholers of Archippus did use wit and 
memorie in steed of bookes. They divide this in twaine ; the one 
expoundeth with philosophicall reason the secrets of the lawe and 
the bible, wherein (they sale) that Salomo7t was verie cunning ; 
bicause it is written in the Hebrew stories, that he disputed from the 
Cedar of Libamis,evQn to the Hisop, and also of birds, beasts, &c. 
The other is as it were a symbolicall divinitie of the highest contem- 
plation, of the divine and angelike vertues, of holie names and 
signes ; wherein the letters, numbers, figures, things and armes, the 
prickes over the letters, the lines, the points, and the accents doo all 
signifie verie profound things and great secrets. By these arts the 
Atheists suppose Moses wrote all his miracles, and that hereby 
they have power over angels and divels, as also to doo miracles : yea 
and that hereby all the miracles that either anie of the prophets, or 
Christ himselfe wrought, were accomplished. 
But C. Agrippa having searched to the bottome of this art, saith it 
is nothing but superstition and follie. Otherwise you maie be sure 
Christ would not have hidden it from his church. For this cause the 
145. Jewes/ were so skilful! in the names of God. But there is none other 
name in heaven or earth, in which we might be saved, but Jesus : 
neither is that meant by his bare name, but by his vertue and good- 
nes towards us. These Cabalists doo further brag, that they are able 
hereby, not onelie to find out and know the unspeakeable mysteries of 
God ; but also the secrets which are above scripture ; whereby also 
they take upon them to prophesie, and to worke miracles : yea hereby 
they can make what they list to be scripture ; as Valeria Proba did 
picke certeine verses out of Virgil alluding them to Christ. And 
therefore these their revolutions are nothing but allegoricall games, 
which idle men busied in letters, points, and numbers (which the 
Hebrew toong easilie suffereth) devise, to delude and cousen the 
simple and ignorant. And this they call Alphabetarie or Arythman- 
ticall divinitie, which Christ shewed to his apostles onelie, and which

