 Corselets, which are an ancient Danish Charm of Neck-laces, 
composed of Thunderstones ingraven with Magical Letters, to resist 
all noxious influences, and the danger of Lightning. 
6. Pentacles are a fourth sort of appendix, which Conjurers, Pentacies, 
Charmers, and Magicians use, being made with five corners, accord- 
ing to the five Senses, and the operation thereof inscribed upon the 
corners ; the matter whereof they are composed, is fine Linnen 
Another Ma- 
gician, 
What Charms 
are.

--- PAGE 632 ---
534 
Book II. A Discouvse concerning 
doubled, and done with Cere-cloth between. This figure the Magician 
holds in his hand, lifting it up from the skirt of his Garment to which 
it is annexed, when Spirits that are raised are stubborn and rebellious, 
refusing to be conformable unto the Ceremonies and Rites of Magick. 
Their force. 7- Also by the holding forth o{ Pentacles, with these words, ffilaufon, 
67. santor,/ atmoviila, Utor, 13corfea, iitroalft, iancpfjevaton, repeated at the 
instant. The evil Spirits that possess the bodies of bewitched people are 
cruelly tortured and amazed, being by the frequent repetition thereof 
forced at last to depart by the assistance of the Exorcism of the sixth 
Cannon for the order of Seraphims. 
Telesms. 8. When Magicians exercise Conjuration by Moon-light in the 
Mountains or Valleys, they have another sort of Charm by way of 
Telesms, which they bury within a hundred paces of the place where 
the Circle is composed towards the East, West, North, and South ; 
For such spells have the secret power to hinder any living creature 
for coming near them, till their Exercize be done, except the Infernal 
Spirit, whose presence they do so ardently desire. 
For Diseases. 9. Such Spells as are made in some Edible inatter, with Characters 
Kpon them, are given for Agues, Head-ach, Epilepsie, Mother, &c. 
Especially being powerful in operation, when the party is ignorant of 
the Charm taken in ; many such I know have taken wonderful effect. 
But as for Philtres, Potions, and Love-cups, they proceed rather from 
a natural cause ; whether their effects be to afflict with Diseases to 
Poyson, or to provoke unto Love of a Party whom they disdain : 
Neither are such to be numbered amongst Charms ; because their 
effect is meerly natural, from a natural cause. 
Fumigations. lo. But to insist further upon the nature of Conjuration, Magicians 
do much exercise their time in Fiaiiigations unto those Spirits whom 
they are about to provoke ; their fumes being distributed according 
to the nature of the Spirit under any of the seven Planets, which the 
antient Conjurers were very punctual in observing, though in these 
days it be much forgot, as superfluous, or rather dangerous to insert 
amongst the Ceremonies of Conjuration. A division of Fumigations 
according to the Influence of the Planets, and Orders of Spirits, we 
will here set down in this manner. 
For Saturn. 1 1 . Fumigatious for Saturn are made of Frankincense Trees, Pepper- 
p ^;^.-| -wort Rooots,* Storax, and Galbanum; by these the Spirits iilarfias, €"ov- 
tan, ^tiltton, Jttios, &c. And all of the first order in the astringency are 
appeased and provoked, when the fumes are put upon a Tripod in the 
hour of Saturn according to the Planetary division. These Fumiga- 
tions make these Spirits appear like old men, with promiss beards, and 
meager looks ; like Serpents, Cats, Wolves, Badgers, Panthers ; like 
old Men in Armout ; like Trumpeters in many ranks and divisions.

--- PAGE 633 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. vi. 535 
12. For Spirits under Jjipitcr, they take Lignum Aloes, Ashen-Keys, Jufitcr. 
Benjamin, Storax, Peacocks-feathers, and Lapis Lazuli^ mixing the 
same with the blood of a Stork, a Swallow, or a Hart ; the brains being 
also added. The ftimcs are kindled in Jtcpiters hour, and in a place 
appropriate to his nature. And by this sacrifice the Spirits of the 
next order are called up, like glorious Kings with many attendants, 
and mighty pomp ; with Heralds before them, and Ensign-bearers, 
Trumpeters, Guards, and all sorts of musical Instruments. 
13. They make Ftimigations unto such Spirits of the order of Mars. 
Powers, as are under Mars, in the Planetary division with Aromatick 
Gum, Bdellium, Euphorbium, Load-stone, Hellebore white and black, 
and an addition of Sulphur to make them into an Amalgama, with 
Man's blood, and the blood of a black Cat ; which mixtures are said 
to be exceeding magical : so that without any other addition, they say, 
this fumigation is able of it self to make such Spirits to appear before 
the Exorcist ; at their appearance they come with weapons brandish- 
ing, and shining Armour, being terrible in their looks ; yet of power 
inferiour to the Spirits of Saturn, though they can likewise shew 
themselves as Lions, Wolves, Tygers, Bears, and all other cruel or 
ravenous Beasts. 
14. They do likewise unto the Spirits under Sol, being of the order Soi. 
of Thrones, Suffiimigate Saffron, Musk, Laurel, Cinnamon, Amber- 
griece. Cloves, Myrrhe, and Frankincense, Musk, and the Balsamick 
Tree mixed up together with the brain of an Eagle, and the blood of 
a white Cock, being made up like Pills, or little Balls, and put upon 
the Tripod ; their appearances are Castles, Gardens,/ Mountains, 68. 
Rivers, Fisher-men, Hunters, Reapers, Dogs, Sheep, Oxen, and other 
domestick Beasts. 
15. Under Venus are the Spirits of the sixth order in the Powers ; Venus. 
their appearances are very stately, like the nature of the Planet ; like 
Courtiers, Ladies, Princes, Queens, Infants, Children, and fragrant 
smells. The fumigations appropriate unto them are Roses, Coral, 
Lignum Aloes, and Sperma Ceti made up with Sparrows, brains and 
blood of Pidgeons to be fumigated with a Song. 
16. Mercury sendeth Horsemen, Fishers, Labourers, Priests, Mercury. 
Students, Servants, &^c. Also, Foxes, Serpents, Dogs, Hares, Hyena's, 
Hydra's, and other Monstrous Animals ; unto him they fmigate 
Frankincense, Mastick, Cinkfoyl, incorporated with the brain of a 
Fox, and the blood of a Mag-Pye. 
17. Spirits under Luna are like Ghosts and shadows, very gastly to tuna. 
behold ; though in humane shape sometimes male, sometimes female. 
Fumigations are offered unto them of Frogs dryed, white Poppy-seed, 
Bulls Eyes, Camphire, and Frankincense, incorporated with Gooses 
blood, and the menstruous blood of Women.

--- PAGE 634 ---
536 
Book II. 
A Discourse concernins[ 
o 
Why such Ce- jg^ These are the divisions of fumimtions, neither can it be denved, 
remonies are . ^ , . , . ' , . ' 
offeree. but that in many Ceremonies of this kind, there is great inherent 
virtue according to the Doctrines of Sympathy and Antipathy, 
whereby every thing is drawn by its Hke in the Idea, whither by words 
or actions, according to the saying, In verbis, herbis 6^ lapidibiis 
latet virtus, so that the Ceremonies and Charms, with other circum- 
stances used by Magicians, are doubtless prevalent to the accomplish- 
ment of that work which they undertake ; to wit. The calling up and 
Exorcizifig of Infernal Spirits by Conjurations, 
Chap. VII. 
Charms. 
Natural Ope- 
rations. 
Places ascri- 
bed to the 
seven Planets. 
Being the Conclusion of the Whole ; wherin divers antient Spells, 
Charms, Incantations and Exorcisms are briefly spoken of. 
B 
I Esides what the Author hath set down, there be many other 
Spells and Charms, which Tradition hath left unto Posterity, 
being many of them effectual for the thing intended by them, 
as in the precedent Chapter is set down, wherein the Orders of Fumi- 
gations are described. Besides there are Magical Characters attri- 
buted to the Planets, whereof Telesms, Periapts, Amulets, zxiA Philters, 
are composed by buryings, writings, bindings, engravings, alligations, 
&c. to effect various purposes in Astrological hours. To conquer 
Enemies, cure diseases, overturn Cities, stop Inundations, render 
bodies Invulnerable, and the like ; which are all effected by medium's 
of this kind, with the assistance of Imagination. 
2. Yet are there many natural Compositions, which have very stu- 
pendious effects of themselves, without assistance of Superstition ; for 
the commixtion of things is of two-fold force or vertue : First, When 
the Celestial vertues are duly disposed in any natural body ; so that 
in one thing are couched various Influences of superiour Powers. The 
second is, from Artificial mixtures and Compositions of natural things 
amongst themselves, in a certain proportion to agree with the Heavens 
under certain Constellations. This proceeds from the correspondence 
of natural things amongst themselves, whereby things are effected even 
unto admiration, as Agrippa declares. Cap. 35. lib. i. 
3. And as unto every Planet certain fumigations are ascribed ; so 
unto such Spirits as are under them, certain Places are adopted for 
the Ceremonies* of Conjuration, which Magicians chose when they set

--- PAGE 635 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. vn. 537 
upon their works of Darkness. Unto Saturn are ascribed dark 
melancholy Places, Vaults, Tombes, Monasteries, empty Houses, Dens, 
Caves, Pits. Unto Jicpiter, Theaters, Schools, Musick houses, Judg- 
ment seats. To Mars, Fields where Battels have been fought, Bake- 
-houses, Glass-houses, Shambles, Places,* of Execution. To Sol, [* "'^l 
Palaces,/ Mountains, Meddows, Sunshine, Groves, and upper Rooms. 69. 
To Venus, Fountains, Meadows, Gardens, and the Sea-shore. Unto 
Mercury, all publick places belonging unto Cities. To Luna, 
Wildernesses, Woods, Rocks, Forrests, Ships, High-wayes, S^c. 
4. In like manner are Spells and Charms adapted to the thing Speiis. 
which they must effect, according to the matter, form and place of 
their composition ; as for the procuring of Love, they bury Rings, 
Ribbons, Seals, Pictures, Looking-Glasses, &^c. in Stews, Baths, Beds, 
that in such places they may contract some Venereal faculty : When 
they gather Herbs or other Ingredients ; they chuse the hour and 
place, when such Planets have Dominion as are over these Herbs, 
which they collect, ever remembring to turn their faces to the East, or 
South, when Saturnine, Martial or Jovial Herbs are gathered, because 
their Principal houses are Southern signs ; for Venereal, Mercurial, or 
Lunary herbs, they must look towards the West or North, because 
their houses are chiefly Northern signs. Yet in any Solar or Lunar 
operations the body of the Sun and Moon must be respected in the 
operation. 
5. Colours are also much regarded amongst Magicians, according Secret Con- 
to the Planet, as black, leaden, brown, unto Saturn ; saphire, vernal, 
green, purple, golden, unto Jupiter ; red, burning, violet, bloody, and 
iron colours unto Mars ; golden, saffron, scarlet, &!^c. unto the Stc7i ; 
white, fair, green, ruddy, pleasant mixed colours unto Venus, Mtircury, 
and Luna. In like manner they ascribe colours unto the twelve 
Houses, and according to the Planets have also certain compositions 
for fire that produce wonderful operations ; as Lamps of Serpents 
skins will make Serpents to appear. Oylthat hath stood under Grapes, 
being lighted, presenteth the Chamber full of Grapes. Centaury and 
the Lapwings blood makes people seem like Gyants, and in the 
open air will make the Stars seem to move up and down in the 
Elements. The fat of a Hare lighted in a Lamp, will cause Women to 
be exceeding merry and facetious. And Candles composed of things 
that are Sattirnine, raise terrours and melancholy in the party that 
lights them, and in those that are lighted by them. 
6. Such wonderful effects have natural things being fitted unto their The Candle of 
Hours and Constellations, as also when they are used to prove such 
effects as the nature of the things doth produce of it self, though in a 
weaker degree. To raise Tempests Magicians burn the Liver of a

--- PAGE 636 ---
538 Book II. A Discouvse coiiceming 
That Chara- 
cters are com- 
pacts. 
70. 
The force of 
Words and 
Characters. 
The vanity of 
Conjuration. 
Camoslion on the house top. To cause strange sights they hang the Gall 
of a Ox over their Beds ; to bring Apparitions and Spirits, they make 
a strange fume of a Mans Gall, and the Eyes of a black Cat ; Which, 
Agrippa saith, he hath often made experience of. There is also a 
strange Magical Candle described amongst Chyjtiical Authors, which 
being lighted, foretells the death of the party to whom it belongs : 
The manner thereof is thus ; They take a good quantity of the venal 
blood luke-warm as it came out of the vein, which being Chymically 
prepared -cuith Spirit of Wine and other Ingredietits, is at last made 
up into a Candle, which being once kitidled, never goes out till the 
death of the party whose blood it is composed of ; for when he is sick, or 
in danger, it btcrns dim and troubled ; and when he is dead, it is quite 
extinguished; of which Composition a Learned man hath wrote an 
intire Tractate, De Biolychnio, or. The Lamp of Life. 
7. But to proceed to the nature of Characters, Sigils, and other 
Ceremojiies, we find that not only such as pretend to command over 
all sorts of Spirits ; but also they that do make Compacts, and have 
sold themselves unto him, do make use of such ; which instance is 
sufficient to prove what a wise man hath asserted, that although Evil 
Spirits have so blinded Mens Eyes, as to make them believe they are 
defended by such Ceremonies, and that these Characters are as Muni- 
tions against the Devils malignancy ; Yet these very Characters, 
Sigils, Lamins, &c., are Cotnpacts themselves, which the Devils did at 
first cunningly disguise with strange Repetitions in uncouth Language. 
8. So that we have grounds to believe, that none is able absolutely 
without Compact to call up any Spirit. But that whosoever hath pre- 
tended to be famous in/ the Art of Magick or Conjuration, hath (to 
himself unknown) compacted with and worshipped the Devil, under 
strange Repetitions and mystical Characters, which to him seemed to 
have effects quite contrary to what they really had. 
9. Neither is this to be admired, that without the Knowledge or 
Consent of the Magician, a Cojttract is made with Evil Spirits ; when 
we consider the magical strength of Words and Characters, which of 
themselves can cure Diseases, pull down, infect, save, destroy, charm 
and inchant without the Parties assistance, either in knowledge of the 
Cause, or in belief of the Consequence or Effect. 
ID. But on the contrary, I could instance a multitude of Examples 
of such as have spent much time in Conjurations to no purpose, still 
attempting by Exorcisms and Defensive Prayers to conjure a Spirit, or 
cause Personal Appearances, with severe Imprecations and powerful 
Charges, and yet notwithstanding have never attain'd their purpose, 
nor at any time heard, or seen any Beeing, which may be called 
Spectre, or Apparition.

--- PAGE 637 ---
Devils and Spirits. 
Ch.\p. VII. 
539 
Exorcising, or 
casting oat. 
Lite desires 
its like. 
11. WTiich is nothing wonderful, if we minde the sympathy of things By Sinuiimde. 
in Nature, how each desires its like, and hunteth after it as the 
Loadstone draws Iron ; the male coveteth the female ; the e\il after 
the evil, and the good after the good ; which is seen in wicked Men 
and their Association, in Birds and Beasts of prey ; while on the con- 
trary, the Lamb delights not in the Lyon, nor the Sheep in the society 
of the Wolf ; neither doth the nature which is totally depraved and 
estranged from God, care to be forced or drawn compulsively by 
another contrar>- nature, viz. innocent, just, and harmless. 
12. Neither doth it consist with natural reason, That Evil Spirits 
should affect the society' of those that are their Enemies, who make use 
of the dreadful and holy Names of God in Conjurations to call them 
up; whereas they are rather antidotes against Apparations,* as maybe ['i'^] 
seen in various Examples of holy?^Ien, who by Prayers and Exorcisms 
have banished Evil Spirits in all Ages, which is also further evident, 
in that the very form of Dispossessing and Exorcising is made up of 
divers Prayers and Defensive Blessings against the obnoxious 
influences of I?ifernal Spirits. 
13. Therefore though I would be far from describing an undenyable 
course of Conjuring Spirits, or of causing Apparitions : Yet this I 
must assert conclusively from what is before alledged, That if any 
thing would be called or wrought upon, it must be with something 
which is of its own nature, as a bait to catch or tempt it ; for in catch- 
ing Birds, Beasts, or Fishes, such esculents as are properly for these 
Animals, are made use of to allure them, neither can mankinde 
command them by any threats to come into his custody. 
14. How much less is mankind able to compel the Infernal Spirits, 
the vtry least of which Kingdom, is able, if let loose, to exterminate a 
thousand lives, and utterly over-turn poor mortals and their doings, 
as various by-past accidents can evince : But whosoever hath com- 
pacted with them for body, soul, and works, such they are at unity 
with, and unto such they appear for the advancement of their Kingdom 
in the destruction of others ; for they are grafted into them and 
incorporated into their ver)' heart and soul, which unavoidably 
becomes their wages when the body falls away. 
15. Yet many wayes there be by Images, Telesnts, and Amulets, 
which have little or no dependance upon Conjuration, or the strength 
thereof, being rather effectual from sympathetical Causes, as many 
natural conclusions prove. And Paracelsits speaks of a way by the 
Image of any Bird or Beast to destroy that Animal, though at a 
distance ; so by hair, fat, blood, excrements, excrescences, &^c. of any 
Animal or Vegetable, the ruin or cure of that thing may be effected. 
16. Which is seen in the Armary Unguent, and the SjTnpathetical 
Nothing is 
compelled by 
contraries.

--- PAGE 638 ---
Book II. 
A Discottrse concerning 
Powder. In the instance of divers Histories, of such as used Waxen 
Images, composed in divers postures, and under certain Constellations, 
whereby several have been tormented and macerated even unto death; 
and according to the punishment or torment which the Magician 
71. intends to afflict, accordingly do they dispose the/ hour of the Composi- 
tion, and the posture or semblance of the Image. 
Of Images of^^ 17. For if a malitious minded Witch intends to consume and pine 
is wrought by away the Life or Estate of any miserable Man or Woman, she makes 
his Image of Wax in such an ominous aspect as may conduce to her 
design, making several magical Characters upon the sides of the head, 
describing the Character of the hour or Planetary time upon the 
breast of the Image ; the name of the party on his forehead ; the 
intended effect to be wrought upon him upon his back. When they 
cause aches, pains, and violent pangs in the sinews and the flesh, they 
stick thorns and pins in divers places of their arms, breasts, and legs. 
When they cast them into Feavers and Consumptions, they spend an 
hour in every day to warm and turn the Image before a doleful and 
lingring fire, composed of divers exotick Gums, and magical Ingre- 
dients of sweet Odours, and strange Roots of shrubs, efficient for their 
purpose. 
Furtiier con- 1 8. Wondcrful are the various postures and pranks which Magicians 
Images. P^^Y ^^'^^ Images ; neither will I mention the most perfect and pre- 
valent part of the practice of Images, and the powerful operations 
thereof, least the evil minded should work abominations therewith 
upon the Persons or Possessions of their neighbours. 
Of Images ig. According to the nature of what they would effect they frame 
provoking . " , - 111 ■ t 
Love, their Images ; if by Images they would provoke two parties to love, 
or be enamoured on one another, they frame their Images naked, with 
Astrological Observations and Imbraces of those that are Venereal ; 
to provoke unto enmity they place malignant Characters and Aspects, 
and the Images in a fighting posture. 
20. If their intentions be for good, all their Characters are engraven 
upon the foreparts of the body. But if they would afflict the party 
with Consumption, or with death, they thrust Needles through the 
hearts, and engrave their Characters upon their Posteriors, or upon 
their shoulders, using all their Conjurations retrograde, and repeating 
every Charm opposite to the former. 
21. Thousands of strange and uncouth Charms might be here 
described, according to the exact form wherein Tradition hath left 
them ; But I have only insisted upon the description of the natures 
in General ; And as by Images and Telesms, the Europeans have 
[* sic'] effected admirable things : so the Tartars have a wonderful ways* of 
Forms of producing the like effects, by Botles, Sheepskins, Rods, Basins,

--- PAGE 639 ---
Devils and Spirits. 
Chap. VII. 
Letters, or Missives, unto certain Spirits, and many otherwayes 
unheard of in Europe. 
22. As for the Tying of the Point, which is a strong impediment 
in Conjugal Rites, to restrain the acts of secresie betwixt two 
marryed persons ; This knot or Hgament is become so notorious both 
in the practice and effect throughout France, Italy, and Spain, as also 
in all the Easierti Countries, that the Laws of several Nations have 
prohibited the performance thereof; neither is it fit to be openly 
described in this place. 
23. Other stratagems they have by turning the Sive with a pair of 
Sizzers by voices uttered out of skins, which is in common amongst the 
Turks by Letters wrote unto certain Spirits, which by due appoint- 
ments will have their answers returned. By the Turning of the Cord 
with several names wrapped round the same, which with certain 
repetitions will of it self be tyed into several strange knots which unty 
themselves again. Besides the many wayes by Lots, in extractings* 
Scrolls, consulting with the Staff and the empty Pot, with others 
tedious to be enumerated. 
24. The Art of Transpla7itation is also reckoned amongst Charms 
with the vulgar. And indeed one member thereof, viz. the Trans- 
ferring of Diseases is really Magical, and much in practice amongst 
Witches ; for by certain baits given to any domestick Beasts they 
remove Feavers, Agues, and Consumptions from Martial men, or from 
one to another by burying certain Images in their neighbours 
ground they bring all evil fortune to the owner of the ground, 
yet/ though they add strange Words and Conjurations in the practice, 
the effects thereof are more from Nature then Conjuration. 
25. For, by the same Cause, those that are profound, can destroy 
diseases, take off Warts, and other Excrescences, kill, cure, purge and 
poyson at a distance from the party, by their hair, fatt, blood, nails, 
excrements, Ssr'c. or by any root, or carnuous substance, rubbed upon 
their hands, breasts or leggs, by burying which, they free them from 
Diseases, which experiments take effect according to the Mediums 
and their Consumption under ground. 
26. And as by natural reason every Magical Charm or Receipt had 
its first institution ; In like manner have Magicians disposed the 
Matter and Manner together with the times of their Utensils and 
Instruments, according to the Principles of Nature : As the Hour 
wherein they compose their Garments, must either be in the hour of 
Luna, or else of Saturn, in the Moons increase. 
27. Their Garments they compose of White Linnen, black Cloth, 
black Cat-skins, Wolves, Bears, or Swines skins. The Linnen 
because of its abstracted Quality for Magick delights not to have any 
Charms in 
Tariiiry. 
The tying of 
the Point. 
Charming by 
the Sive. 
By Bottles, 
Skins, Letters, 
Cords, Lots. 
[* sicl 
Transplantati- 
on, Ceremo- 
nious.! 
[t Ceremonies] 
72. 
And meerly 
natural. 
Magical In- 
struments : 
Their matter.

