ost manly, 
but with crooked Noses, like Mermaids, or Satyres. And of all the 
rest it is to be observed, that as not one single Lust or Vice hath 
dominion without mixture in the evil Spirits, so they are not of a 
distinct shape lik one single Beast, but compounded into Monsters, 
with Serpents-tails, four eyes, many feet and horns, S^c. 
As they appear 
to Magicians 
in the liighest 
rank. 
[* = indue] 
In the lower 
orders. 
61. 
That the De- 
vils are answe- 
rable to the 
unclean Beasts.

--- PAGE 624 ---
526 
Book II. A DtscoursB concemzng 
The shapes of 
Damned Souls, 
Their times 
and seasons. 
Their places of 
appearance. 
When Tem- 
pests reign. 
According to 
the situation 
of Regions. 
29. And as in general, these are the shapes of Devils, so the par- 
ticular shapes of Damned Souls are to be considered in the same 
manner with the rest, only with this difference, that they are more 
addicted to metamorphose themselves and vary their appearances. 
Though, for the most part, the Damned Souls retain the humane shape 
after a Magical manner, so that the greatest part of that numberless 
number are in their antient shapes, especially when they appear in 
sleep to their surviving acquaintance. Their aspects are very dismal 
and melancholy like the Ghosts of the Astral source. 
30. Now to speak of the Times and Seasons of their Appearance. 
The better sort of Magicians to square their times with Astrological 
hours, especially of Saturn, Luna, and Venus, in the Moons increase, 
and the middle of the night, or twelve a clock at noon : In which 
hours they do likewise compose their Garments, Caps, Candlesticks, 
Figures, Lamins, Pentacles, and Circles for Conjuration. As for the 
Times in respect of their Infernal Courses, the fittest are when they 
spring up in the Wrath, or when they sink in the Dispair, which is a 
mystery to the learned Conjurers of Europe. 
31. In respect of this exterior World, they can most easily appear 
in solitary places, when the Sun is down ; for they are naturally at 
enmity with the Sun, because it stands as a type of the Mediator, or 
Heart and Centre which they lost utterly in their fall, and now are 
destitute of, like a wheel without an axletree. And indeed, the want 
of this is the chief cause of all their torment, and of the rising of the 
gnawing Worm, when they consider of their irrevocable sentence, and 
irrecoverable loss, 
32. In storms of Hail, or Snow, Wind, Tempest, and Lightning, is 
accounted amongst Magicians, a time for Conjuring at an easie rate. 
And they say, That such Ceremonies will prove very effectual, if a 
Conjurer begin his Exorcisms in the hour and day of Luna, in the 
middest of a furious storm of Lightning, Rain, and Thunder, in a low 
Vault or Celler that is close and retired. Also when the Wind blows 
high, without Rain, they say, the Devils are more near the Kingdom 
of this World, and may with great facility be soUicited or raised at 
such a season, because they delight in all extremities of weather, 
being themselves the first cause of the disorder of the properties in 
the Kingdom of Nature. 
33. But in some Countries they can more easily appear then in 
others, according to the Constellations, for they delight much in the 
extremities of the two Poles toward Lapland, Nova Zernbla, Green- 
land, Tartary ; and in the South towards the Islands scattered 
about the confines of Terra Incognita. They are likewise easily 
Invocated on the shoar amongst lofty Rocks and Precipices, or in/

--- PAGE 625 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. v. 527 
Deserts and Wildernesses far from Towns or Inhabitants. And it is 62. 
said, they do much respect the motion of the Seas in their appearance 
unto such as solicite them in places Maritime or Plagiary. 
34. As for their Rancks or Orders, there is some difficulty in the J'^^'^^^"''^ 
true discovery thereof, by reason that we know not certainly of what 
Orders they were that Fell. The opinion of most men is, That of 
every Order many fell. But those that better know the nature of the 
Heavenly Hierarchies, have sufficiently proved, That of any Ranck or 
Order tione can fall unless all do follow. Therefore with more reason 
may it be judged, That before the Devils fell, the Hierarchy of Heaven 
did consist of three Rancks or Orders ; to wit, the Order of Hriel, of 
iHtrfiarl, of iLurifcr : That of Hiicifer is totally in Hell: The other 
which is under fHicfiarl, is the dominion of Heaven : The last which 
is Mricls, are more in the dominion of this third principle of the Stars, 
having the Planets in their dominion, with the influences thereof. 
35. So that the foregoing Catalogue, transcribed by the Author of In three distin- 
Xh\s Discovery, is utterly feigned and fictitious, because it makes these 
many sorts of Devils to have Dominion over several Legions in several 
distinctions of Seraphims, Powers, Thrones, Dominatio7is, Chertcbims, 
&c. Whereas the whole Kingdom of Hell consists but of one only 
Hierarchy, which is that of Huctfcr and his Legions, reduced by their 
exorbitances into that Lacrj-mable posture wherein they now are and 
shall be for ever. Which Doctrine seriously weigh'd will prove the 
attempts of Conjurers and Magicians to be utterly vain, and their 
forms of Invocation vanity and falshood. 
36. Their number may be thought upon more narrowly, if we con- Tjieir num- 
sider that they consist of one Hierarchy and no more ; yet must we 
confess that the limit is not to be put thereunto, because their nature 
is to Germinate and Multiply as they please, contracting and dilating 
themselves according to the force of their imaginative powers and 
faculties. But although this be granted, yet there is a setled number 
of Devils that varj'eth not. Though of Damned Souls the number is 
numberless and unfathomable ; yet as to their extent of room or place, 
it is never the more because of their multitude, they being able to truss 
a thousand Legions into the carcass of a man. As for the opinions of 
Authors, they are various ; it is believed by some. That the Starrs are 
answerable to their number ; others speak of the Sands upon the Sea- 
shore : however it be, this is certain, They are even imiumerable in 
respect of humane Capacities. 
yj. Their Natures are now to be considered as they belong to the Their natnres 
hellish source or quality. In themselves they rest not, neither are properties, 
they capable of the length or shortness of time, nor of the alternate 
courses of day and night. The wickedness which they committed in

--- PAGE 626 ---
52S Boos II. A Discourse comerning 
The VarietT 63. 
thereof. 
this life, are their continual torment, which do Magically gnaw and 
corrode them, rising and boyling up perpetually within them, all the 
refrigeration which they have, is by intercourse when the height of 
Wickedness begins to stirr them in blasphemies against God, and 
towring up above heaven and goodness, in their adulterated Imagina- 
tions, which is unto them as sport and pastime with one another, and 
lasteth such a space as with us makes up fort)- minutes. Neither 
Their tonneits doth this any whit advantage them, but rather adds to their torment ; 
for pain discontinued is the greater : neither would vexation be ve.xa- 
tion, if it had no respite or forbearance ; That the contrary might be 
also manifest, Xam contraria juxia seposita tnajus elucescunt. Yet is 
their torment exceedingly different, so that the torment of one, in respect 
of another, is but a Dream or Phansie ; I mean, amongst the Damned 
Souls, and not the Devils, for the pain and sorrow of the Devils is 
greater then the greatest of the lost Souls, by many thousand degrees, 
according to the course of nature and reason ; for that which falls 
highest, suffers most, and optima corrupta fiunt pessima.' 
38. But wonderful and manifold are the torments which all in 
general of the Infernal troops, do suffer according to the various lusts 
they reigned in whilst they lived upon the earth. The cruel Murtherers 
that died in the boyling source of blood and emy, their torment is the 
greatest, they are continually Murthering in their imaginations, and 
seeking, like dreaming men, to do what the want of the Organ will not 
suffer them ; for according to the sa\-ing of the wisest upon this Sub- 
ject, this is the torment and miserj- of all the Damned, TJiat they are 
continually -jjishing and woulding j atid in H'ouldings they generate 
Ideas and representations, Ti-hich are the species of their continual 
aggravations and deceiving fihansies. 
39. Those that were buri ed in Lust and Gluttony, Drunkenness and 
Lasciviousness, are also in miserable torments, yet much inferiour to 
the first ; they are continually imagining their former pleasures in the 
Magia as in a dream, which when they wake, torments them cruelly ; 
they are often hanging, stabbing, and mangling themselves for love, 
and perpetually sinking down in sorrow and despair, if they were such 
as died in love, or in the height of their Astral affections, lea\-ing 
behind them a heap of desires and lusts, which are the only cause of 
aU their torment. And we may well compare the passions of Melan- 
choly persons, or such as in Deserts, Woods, and Mountains, pine 
away for love of Women, unto their torments ; which indeed being 
the trouble of the mind, are absolutely the greatest and hea\-iest that 
the source or property- of this World affordeth, I mean, the perturba- 
tions of the minde in general. 
Their lorment 40. Such souls in whom the boyling source of Anger and Rage, 
The Nat"e 
thereoL

--- PAGE 627 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. v. 
529 
hath had a dwelling or receptacle, if they depart unmortified, do also 
enter into a most dreadful kind of torment, which continually ariseth 
as a biting Worm and hungry fire to double and accumulate the 
excess of despair upon them, if they have much domineered therein 
whilst they lived in this World. Also these that reigned in Pride and 
Envy, are ever seeking to pluck God from his Throne, and towring up 
in their Imaginations, as men that dream, still seeking for the King- 
dom of heaven, to insult and boast therein ; but the quahty thereof is 
utterly occult and estranged from them ; so that they can never finde, 
taste, hear, nor see it, though it be through and through with their 
own peculiar principle. This adds perpetually to their misery, and 
ariseth at times with horrible pangs and gnawings, like the irksome 
and vexatious pains and aches subject to Mans body, which cease 
a while and then begin to shoot and ake by intercourse, as the Gowt, 
Tooth-ach, Head-ach, Convulsion, Gripings, and the Stone. 
41. Thus their torments are in brief described, but indeed the 
capacity of Man is not able to reach the description of their cruel 
miseries, and continual pangs which they contracted upon themselves; 
for every faculty is sufficiently plagued. The Sence of Hearing is 
disturb'd with harsh and rugged sounds, which are as an antipathy 
to that Organ ; as rough and scraping sounds externally offend the 
ears, and set the teeth on edge, by affecting the tender fibres of the 
same. Their Sight is likewise cruelly offended and affrighted with 
monstrous appearances and Ideas represented continually to their 
imaginations. And there is not any loathsome taste in the Kingdome 
of this World, either Animal, Vegetative, or Mineral, which they are 
at any time void of, being continually pestered and suffocated with 
filthy fumes and smoaks of hellish fruits, as of Sulphurean stinks, and 
abominations. 
42. Neither are the other Sences of the Touch and Smell behind 
in participation of the like Torments, which their own iniquities do 
perpetually excite and create unto them ; besides, they are ever 
vexing one another ; and if any be in the same misery with whom 
they had acquaintance here on *eath, the very Magical knowledge, 
and perceivance, or remembrance thereof, doth beyond utterance or 
conception, most miserably afflict and macerate their Souls and all 
their Sences./ 
43. For the nature of their habitation is such, that their torment is 
exceedingly aggravated thereby, because the extremity of the four 
Elements is there converted into a whole Principle of wrath and 
vexation. The excess of cold and heat, drought and moisture, are 
continually raging amongst them by intercourse. Neither is there 
any light or lustre to be seen within their Courts, but that which 
3Y 
in the source 
of Anger. 
In all the five 
Senses. 
By their ac- 
quaintance on 
earth. 
[* read, earth] 
64. 
The Nature of 
Hell.

--- PAGE 628 ---
530 
Cook II. 
A Discourse concerning 
The food of 
Devils. 
[' .' eternal] 
Their food in 
ihe Astral 
source. 
Their Speech. 
What L.m- 
guage they af- 
fect. 
comes from their fiery Eyes, as a deadly glance or glimmering, being 
sudden fiery flashes and sparkling, as the enkindling of Gunpowder, 
or Aunan fiibiiinaits for a similitude. 
44. And as every kinde of Being feeds upon somewhat of its own 
nature, property, and element, whither it be Plant, Animal, or 
Metalline kinde ; so the Devils are neither destitute of meat, drink, 
nor cloathing, according to their own Kingdom and quality, having 
fruits springing and growing before them of hellish, sour and 
poysonous natures, which are real and palpable unto them, and not 
imaginary or typical, though to us magical and invisible ; neither is 
this to be wondered at, if we consider the nature of Man's Soul, In 
Media Nntura ; for if it feed not upon the internal* and substantial 
Word, which is the very Bread of Life it self, it must of necessity rumi- 
nate on something else, viz. the fruits of Iniquity, which it takes in 
and drinketh up as the Oxe drinks water, so that to the soul the sin 
becomes palpable, glutting, and satiating ; yea, so substantial unto 
the Soul, as Dirt or Ink upon fair white Linnen is to our external 
Eyes ; neither can the Soul be freed from these spots till the water 
above the Firmament wash them away. 
45. Also in respect of the Astral source they are not destitute of 
food, when they bring themselves into the same ; for the gas of 
the air and bias of the water is their nourishment, while they stay 
here, as is before alledged : These influences of the air and water 
they take into their Limbics, and convert into their own poysonous 
natures ; as of sweet and wholsome herbs the filthy Toads and other 
venemous Beasts do make their poyson, converting them into a nature 
like themselves. And on the contrary, the poysonous herbs are con- 
verted into good and wholesome nourishment by other cleanly 
Beasts. 
46. And as the Infernal Troops are considered in respect of the four 
Elements, they have a distinct and peculiar tone or language, which 
they exercise and speak one amongst one another, as mortals do. 
But they have utterly lost the dignity of their sounds according to the 
eternal nature. And are likewise totally corrupted in their pro- 
nouncing, or Dialect, since they fell from their first ceelestial glory ; 
so that their speech is harsh, doleful, and terrible, like the fruits they 
feed upon, and the life they dwell in. Which depravation is very 
apparent in the Kingdom of this World in the divided Languages of 
every Region, according to the Constellation under which they are 
situated : The true and magical Language of nature being hid from 
all the Countreys of the earth. 
47. But when they appear in the outward Elements, they do many 
times express themselves in Irish, Welch, Latine ; or Russian, which

--- PAGE 629 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. v. 
531 
Their uncon- 
stancy. 
65. 
are the Languages most affected by them to answer unto Conjurations, 
or Compacts. So that if any Magician, who is ignorant of these 
aforesaid Languages do at any time Raise or Exorcise such Spirits, 
he must be mindful to confine them to his mother tongue ; least their 
gibberish prove altogether unintelligible ; for as every thing appears 
in what it most affecteth, or is addicted to ; even so the Spirits have 
their distinct affections, passions, and postures, both in word, habit, 
shape, and gesture ; so that the Magician must be wary in Exorcizing 
with them, that he confine them to a different place, posture, shape, 
and language, to answer their intentions without impediment. 
48. For they are very variable and unconstant in their dealings 
with mankind, nor will they stand to any thing that hath not bound 
them by the obligations of Words, Characters, and Imprecations, 
except the skill of the Exorcist be such, that he is able to confine 
them into a Magical Triad, which hath the certain force of obliging 
or compelling them to utter truth, and nothing false in/ all their 
Answers, or Informations. But with such miserable men and women 
as they have made Covenants and Indentures for body, soul, and 
works ; with such I say, they keep no faith, nor are they lyable to their 
commands ; but on the contrary, have them hampered and subjected 
to their will and power, till they have terminated their lives in their 
destruction. 
49. Yet have not any of the most potent Princes in the Hellish Their Power. 
Power, the least ability to destroy the least of the sons of men, with- 
out the consent of the mind and senses of the Soul ; for until the 
will of the Soul be opened unto him, his threatnings, sleights and 
stratagems are without any power or force, as the nerves of a dead 
man. Although naturally every evil Spirit boasteth, as if all the 
world were at its command, and every Soul were subject to its 
authority and beck, with the Goods or Possessions of the external 
World. . 
50. When any evil Spirit is raised up by Conjurations, without 
League, or Compact ; these Spirits so raised, are exceeding fraudulent 
and deceitful, as stubborn servants that do their Masters will by 
constraint, and not by any natural act of obedience unto his Commands. 
But with such as they have compacted, they are frequent and officious, 
imploying them as Agents for the destruction of others and their 
substance : and being marryed unto such, they are even become one 
with them, being incorporated into them, so that they are nothing 
different from incarnate Devils, save that the spark of divine Light, 
which was the gift of God unto repentance, is not totally eradicated 
until the body fall away. 
51. From such as Covenant with these unconstant Spirits, do they Fumigations 
When they are 
called up.

--- PAGE 630 ---
532 
Book II. A Discouvse concerning 
them daily obtain Fumigations, Odours, and Offerings, or Sacrifices of 
Blood, Fire, Wine, Ointments, Incense, Fruits, Excrements, Herbs, 
Gums, Minerals, and other Ingredients, by which from a Magical 
cause, they have more influence and authority over the bewitched 
party to insinuate into their affecti'on, peircing even through their 
bones and marrow, till they have so habituated them to their service, 
that the same becomes their daily bread and sole delight in accom- 
plishing every villany and abomination which the malicious and 
subtle instigation of Satan leads them to. 
The Conclusi- 52. Thus have I Essayed to illustrate the Natures of Infernal 
Beings, which notwithstanding is a Subject so intricate and copious in 
it self, that great difficulty accompanies the Explication thereof ; by 
reason of the variety of their natures in the source of darkness, 
wherein they live, move, eat, breath, and inhabit, having qualities, 
actions, and passions innumerable, to us men-kinde utterly unknown 
and incomprehensible : So that to attempt an ample demonstration 
of this present Subject, would require deeper speculation then the 
matter doth deserve, in regard that there be so many Protei and 
Changlings in that gloomy Kingdom, who do never stay or con- 
tinue in the same nature, property, and form for an hour together ; 
but may be compared to the swiftness of the Windes, or the likeness 
and form of swift running Waters, that pass away as a thought ; and 
are no more remembered. So it is with the Spirits of Darkness, 
whose life is a meer anguish and inconstancy from one sorrow to 
another unto all Eternity./ 
66. ClIAr. VI. 
Treatiiii^ of the Nature, Force and Forms of Charms, Periapts, 
Amulets, Pentacles, Conjurations, Ceremonies, &c. 
Shews before I. T~) Efore Appearances are made, after forms of Conjuration are 
Spinib appear. repeated, the Infernal Spirits make various and wonderful 
shews, noises, and attempts as fore-runners to their appearance: 
At the first attempts of novices in Conjuration, they are accompanyed 
with noises, tremblings, flashes, bowlings, and most dreadful shriekes, 
till after further progress and experience therein they approach nearer 
unto this Elemental nature, till by degrees they can manifestly be 
apparent unto their Exorcist. 
.^■Magtcian."^ 2. When Ckiancungi, and his sister Napala, did first attempt to

--- PAGE 631 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap.vi. 
533 
call up Spirits, they begun with the Spirit loo&int, in the twentieth 
degree : they hung a vault under ground with black both on the top 
and bottom, lining it therewith ; and having drawn the Circle of the 
Order of Thrones, with the seven Planets, and their Magical Charac- 
ters in the Center, they proceeded to the Ceremonies of Conjuration 
after they had frequently repeated the forms of calling, and nothing 
as yet appeared ; they were grown so desperate therein, that forsaking 
the Circle, and every defensive Character or Ceremony, they at last 
betook themselves to the most accursed and detestable branch of 
Magick, which consists of Compacts, or Confederacy ; and having by 
a solemn League summoned the aforesaid Spirit ISofeim, they obtain'd 
155. years from the Spirit, Covenanting therewith for body, soul, and 
works. 
3. In which damned life they continued exercising strange wonders His Actions 
in every Countrey. By the help of this Magician the Tartars did 
destroy above 100 sail of Ships belonging unto Cliina ; many losses 
did he bring upon that Kingdom in their Children, Fruits, Corn, Sill<, 
and Navigation ; he could frequently transport himself through the 
Air, and carry in one hand a thousand pound weight, to the astonish- 
ment of all that knew him. He had many publick contests with 
Magicians of other Countries, being tryals of skill in Magical Art, 
wherein he was said to excel all that ever went before him. 
4. Such another was Lewis Gaiifridi a. French Priest, who had 
compacted with the Devil, and served him 14 years in these de- 
testable works, sacrificing Infants unto him, worshipping him in a 
filthy shape, and tempting others to their Magical society or nocturnal 
Conventions ; in which, as it is reported, they did ever feast and junket 
with varieties and dainties, which though they did seem delectable, 
were yet notwithstanding gustless and unsavoury. 
5. Leaving these relations, something shall be said of Charms and 
Spells, as they are divided in this following manner ; first, such 
Amulets as being engraven and molded in the fashion of Money, or 
Coyn, do serve to provoke any one desired unto love and familiarity, 
.being hung about the neck in certain Planetary hours. Secondly, 
Spells or Charms in Parchment with Magical Characters, as Periapts 
to Cure diseases ; to make one valiant, memorative, and constant. 
Thirdly, Corselets, which are an ancient Danish Charm of Neck-laces, 
composed of Thunderstones ingraven with Magical Letters, to resist 
all noxious influences, and the danger of Lightning. 
6. Pentacles are a fourth sort of appendix, which Conjurers, Pentacies, 
Charmers, and Magicians use, being made with five corners, accord- 
ing to the five Senses, and the operation thereof inscribed upon the 
corners ; the matter whereof they are composed, is fine Linnen 
Another Ma- 
gician, 
What Charms 
are.

