hour of 
Luna, or else of Saturn, in the Moons increase. 
27. Their Garments they compose of White Linnen, black Cloth, 
black Cat-skins, Wolves, Bears, or Swines skins. The Linnen 
because of its abstracted Quality for Magick delights not to have any 
Charms in 
Tariiiry. 
The tying of 
the Point. 
Charming by 
the Sive. 
By Bottles, 
Skins, Letters, 
Cords, Lots. 
[* sicl 
Transplantati- 
on, Ceremo- 
nious.! 
[t Ceremonies] 
72. 
And meerly 
natural. 
Magical In- 
struments : 
Their matter.

--- PAGE 640 ---
542 
Book II. A DlSCOUrSC, &C. 
Utensils that are put to common uses. The skins of the aforesaid 
Animals are by reason of the Satiiriiine and Magical qualities in the 
particles of these beasts : Their sowing thred is of silk, Cats-guts, 
mans Nerves, Asses hairs. Thongs of skins from Men, Cats, Bats, 
Owls, Moles, and all which are enjoyn'd from the like Magical 
cause. 
Substance, 28. Their Needles are made of Hedge-hog prickles, or bones of any 
of the abovesaid Animals : Their lVriti?ig-pens are of Owls or 
Ravens, their Ink of Mans blood : Their Oyntments Mans fat. Blood, 
Usnea, Hoggs-grease, Oyl of Whales. Their Characters are ancient 
Hebrew or Samaritaji : Their Speech is Hebrew or Latine. Their 
Paper must be of the Membranes of Infants, which they call Virgin- 
-parchme}it, or of the skins of Cats, or Kids. Besides, they compose 
their Fires of sweet Wood, Oyl or Rosin : And their Candles of the 
Fatt or Marrow of Men or Children : Their Vessels are Earthen, 
their Candlesticks with three feet, of dead mens bones : Their Swords 
are steel, without guards, the poynts being reversed. These are 
their Materials, which they do particularly choose from the Magical 
qualities whereof they are composed. 
And Form. 29. Neither are the peculiar shapes without a natural cause. Their 
Caps are Oval, or like Pyramids with Lappets on each side, and furr 
within : Their Gowns reach to the ground, being furr'd with white 
Fox-skins, under which they have a Linnen Garment reaching to their 
Knee. Their Girdles are three inches broad, and have many Cabal- 
listical Names, with Crosses, Trines and Circles inscribed thereon. 
Their Knives are Dagger-fashion : and the Circles by which they 
defend themselves are commonly nine foot in breadth, but the Eastern 
Magicians give but seven. And these are the matter and manner of 
their Preparations, which I thought fit here to insist upon, because of 
their affinity with the Instruments of Charms, for both which a 
natural cause is constantly pretended. 
The Conciu- 30. Thus I have briefly spoken of the Nature of every Spirit good 
or evil, so farr as safety or convenience would permit ; adding also 
this last Discourse of Charms and Conjuratio7is, in their speculative 
part, forbearing to describe the Forms themselves, because many of 
them are not only facil, but also of mighty power when they are 
seasonably applyed : So that to describe distinctly, by what means 
Magicians kill, ctire, or cotiquer, were to strengthen the hands of the 
Envious against their Neighbours Lives and Fortunes. And there- 
fore the Readers must rest contented with what is here related of the 
Nature of Astral or Infer}ial Spirits. 
FINIS.

--- PAGE 641 ---
SHAKESPEARE NOTINGS. 
p. 99. Bodin's " asseheaded man". N. Drake, in his Shakespeare 
and his Times, \o\. ii, p. 351, suggested that Bottom's "translation" 
was derived from p. 315 in Scot, where a receipt for such transforma- 
tions is given. This may in part have been in Shakespeare's memory, 
as may the commonly received belief that rnagicians could do such 
things. He may, too, have remembered another tale, told at p. 533, 
of Pope Benedict IX having been condemned after death to walk 
the earth (I presume at night, after his purgatorial day) in a bear's 
skin, with an ass's head in sucli sort as he lived. But I incline to 
think that these after-statements only caused him to remember the 
more this first, full, and remarkable M. Mal-Bodin-Cyprus tale ; and 
more especially this passage, for in iv, i, 30, Bottom declares — - 
" Methinks I have a great desire to a bottle of hay : good hay, sweet 
hay hath no fellow." So acute and ready an observer may have the 
more remembered the epithet "asseheaded" because, as most readers 
must observe, Scot uses this word, though the sailor in the tale is an 
ass from his snout and ears down to the end of his tail and the tips 
of his hoofs. 
P. 542. His "white spirits". Because in the 1623 folio Macbeth 
we have in iv, i, Musicke and a Song. Blacke Spirits, dr'e., and 
because in Middleton's Witch the words are given at length, it has 
been held that Middleton was either Shakespeare's coadjutor, or his 
after interpolator, that these lines were his, and were first used in his 
Witch. But, according to most of Malone's arguments — for one 
certainly is not sound — the Witch was some years later than Macbeth, 
as is also likely from Middleton's age. And that it was later is in 
especial shown by a hitherto unnoticed passage in ii, i : 
" Some knights' wives in town 
Will have great hope upon his reformation," etc. 
For it is clear that this must have been written when the price and 
quality of knighthood had much come down, and its commonness 
increased beyond what it was in 1605. Secondly, it is an assumption, 
and a most unlikely one, that the Macbeth MS. intimation of the song 
was due to the players' knowledge of it through the Witch. It pre- 
supposes that the supernumeraries who played the witches' parts were 
the same in both plays. Also that the writers of the MS. knew that 
these would be the same, and would certainly remember the words: 
for a playhouse copy is either for the use of the prompter, or a text 
whence the players' parts can be extracted. Moreover, the Witch

--- PAGE 642 ---
544 
Shakespeare Notiiigs. 
had been, as the author himself tells us, " an ignorantly ill-fated 
labour", in other words, a failure. 
But in reference to the supposed right of Middleton to these lines, 
we now find, in 1584, when Aliddleton was a boy, that the first of the 
two lines — or, if one chooses, the first two of the four, the words being 
in each half phrase inverted, possibly to vary the too great sing-song 
of the sentence — was copied by Scot as part of a known series of 
rhyming lines. Shakespeare, who wrote later, has the "Black spirits", 
etc.; Middleton, in his Witcli, where we find passages taken ver- 
batim and almost verbatim from Scot, has these and the other rhymes 
given by Scot very slightly altered in i, 2, and the " Black spirits", 
etc., with " Mingle, mmgle'', and some of the other rhymes in v, 2. 
Hence they are neither Shakespeare's nor Middleton's. Whose then are 
they? Scot gives them as from W. W.'s booklet on the Witches at 
St. Osees, Essex. But certainly the lines, nor any of them, are not 
in that booklet. These things, however, are there. Ursula Kempe's 
little boy deposes, and she herself, on promise from the Justice, 
Brian Darcie, Esq., of favour being shown her — which promise, by 
the way, both in her case and that of others, was carried out by their 
being hanged — that she had two he- and two she-spirits, the shes 
being Tyffen, in the shape of a white lamb, and Pigine, black like a 
toad ; the hes, Tittie, like a little grey cat, and Jacke, black like a cat. 
Nor are these merely thus mentioned by each, but the old woman 
specifies their doings through three or four of the earlier pages 
(A 3, v — A 8). Mother Bennet's spirits were two, Suckin, like a black 
dog, and Lyerd, redde like a Lyon (B 3, etc., B 7). Besides these, but 
less prominently brought forward, were these. Mother Hunt had 
two little things like horses, one white and one black, kept in a pot 
amongst black and white wool (A 5, v and 6). Ales Hunt had also 
two spirits, one white and one black, like little colts, and named Jacke 
and Robbin (C 3). Marg. Sammon had a Tom and a Robyn, but 
these were like toads. H. Sellys, aged nine, deposes that his mother 
had two imps, one Herculus sothe hons \sic\ or Jacke, black, and a he, 
who, in the night, and in the likeness of his sister, pulled his younger 
brother's leg and otherwise hurt him so that he cried out ; the second, 
Mercurie, a she and white (D v). Ales Baxter says that the cow 
while being milked was viciously unruly, and that something like a 
white cat struck at her heart, so that she became so weak that she could 
not stand, and being found leaning against a style, was carried home 
in a chair (D 4, v). Ales Mansfield had given her by margaret 
Grevell (elsewhere Gravell) — for these imps seem to have been given 
away without will of their own, like brute beasts, and being hungry 
were fed on milk, beer, bread, oats, hay, straw, and especially a sup 
of blood sucked from the body — two he- and two she-spirits, named 
Robin, Jack, William, and Puppet, alias Mamet, like black cats (D 6). 
Mother Eustace also had three imps, hke white, gray, and black cats. 
Annis Dowsing, aged seven, base daughter of Annis Herd, tells B. 
Darcie that her mother had six Avices or Blackbirds, black speckled 
with white or all black. Also six imps like cows, but " as big as 
rattes", one of which, black and white, and named Crowe, had been

--- PAGE 643 ---
Cinanespeare ivonngs. 
545 
given to her, while Donne [? Dun], another, was red and white (G. 4. 
v). I have, perhaps, overlengthened this tale through wishing to 
show that these imps, besides being hungry, generally took a white 
or black, and sometimes a red or grey, colour, and because these 
notings from this unique book and authentic record might be other- 
wise acceptable. So much do the names and the notice of the colours 
of the imps strike a reader, that Bishop Hutchinson, in his Historical 
Essay concerning Witchcraft, 1718, says, p. 29, "An account of them 
was written by Brian Darcie, with the Names and Colours of their 
spirits." But here an end after the remarks. First, that the chief 
witnesses, and leaders up to these confessions, were their own children 
of from to 9 years of age. Secondly, that these confessions were, 
as plainly as possible, first made by some and then followed by others 
through promises of favour, promises lyingly carried out to condemn- 
ation and death. Thirdly, that, as shown by such instances as "[she] 
desired to speake alone with me, the said Bryan Darcey, whereupon 
I went into my garden", etc., and by the frequent use of " before 
mee" — the initials W.W. were either fictitious, or not improbably those 
of his clerk, and that the real author was Brian Darcie, Esq., Justice 
of the Peace, who desired to gain favour from his kinsman. Lord 
Darcie, to whom the book was dedicated, or possibly, through him 
and it, the notice of her Majesty, as a clever, zealous, and trustworthy 
seeker-out of these old-new things. 
It need hardly be added that ballading was then a profession, and 
that its professors seized upon anything of interest, — an atrocious 
murder, the last words of the murderer (spoken or not), unusual 
floods or storms, the effects of lightning, the cruise of an adventurous 
vessel, shipwrecks, the story of a strange fish "in forme of a woman 
from the wast upward", that appeared " forty thousand fathom above 
water [or otherwise], and sang as followeth". How then should the 
condemnation of some sixteen old women for horrible crimes escape 
being "balletted"? It was new, rare, came home to all, and was in 
more senses than one deadly. The very rhymes in Scot prove it, for 
they could not be Scot's own words, and they have the very rhythm, 
or rather lilt, of a ballad. On looking calmly, therefore, at the evi- 
dence, I am convinced that neither Shakespeare nor Middleton could 
have been the one who tacked together these rhymes between 1 582 and 
1584, but that Shakespeare did here, as he sometimes did, and notably 
in Ophelia's madness, quote such lines as " Black spirits and white", 
etc., because the words suited his scene of devilish enchantment, 
and gave it reality; while Middleton, in a Magical Tragi-Comedy, gave, 
with very slight variation, the whole of the words quoted by Scot. 
I trust my reader will not merely excuse it when it regards Shake- 
speare and Macbeth, if I go a little out of my present road and add 
the few words following. As it has been held that Middleton wrote 
" Black spirits", etc., so it has been supposed that the lines on the 
"Touching for the Evil" were interpolated by Middleton or some 
other, because negative evidence seemed to show that James did not 
take upon himself this custom till a date much later than 1605. 
Lately, however, Prof S. R. Gardiner has discovered that James 
4A

--- PAGE 644 ---
546 
Shakespeare No tings. 
" touched" and was almost compelled to "touch" as early as 1603. 
Its efficacy had been believed in, and was set forth in books ; so that 
the very assumption of this prerogative proved its efficacy, and thus 
proved his rightful heirship to the English crown,— a proof, I suspect, 
not lost sight of by the astute counsellors who counselled its adoption, 
nor by James himself And I think that he must be blind who 
cannot see how this, added to the other evidence set forth in the play, 
and to the true, though somewhat, and of purpose, indirectly exposed 
intent of Macbeth, proved both James's heirship and set forth the 
certain overthrow of all such devilishly contrived plots, — such as, to 
name but three, the attempt at the Carseof Gowrie; the plot in which 
Raleigh was, or was supposed to be, concerned ; and lastly, the gun- 
powder plot — as would alter the predestinate decree of Heaven, that 
James I and VI should be King of Great Britain. Unless, too, I 
am much mistaken, the fears of James were the direct or indirect 
instigators of Shakespeare's play, and the cause of that autograph 
letter to the poet, for which no shadow of a reason can otherwise be 
assigned. 
For convenience' sake I here include some notings illustrative of 
either Shakespeare's indebtedness to Scot, or of those beliefs and 
forms of expression which led both to write as they did. 
P. 10. " They can pull down the moon." This belief, derived from 
classic times, is authority for Prospero's " A witch ... so strong 
That could control the moon" (v, i). So also ii, i, 174. 
 " Corne in the blade." There is frequent reference to this 
in Scot, as here and at pp. A iiii, v, 49, 58, 63, 219,221,482, and else- 
where. But as Staunton saw, this is the nearest to Macbetlis 
"though bladed corn be lodged" (iv, i). Also, though this happens 
more or less in several of the instances, yet especially here, the con- 
text agrees with the thoughts and context-words of Macbeth. 
P. 33. "Anthropophagi and Canibals." Associated synonymes pro- 
bably suggested to both by the same heading in p. iioo of Seb. 
Miinster's Cosmography (Basil, 1550). 
P. 42. " Never faile to danse." An authority for the dancing of 
MacbetlCs witches, and a probable authority for the dancing of 
the latter with broomsticks headed with brooms in their hands. 
P. 54. The " Monarcho" of L. L. Lost appears from this to have 
been a madman. 
P. 64. " Rime either man or beast to death." An extension of the 
Shakespearean and general belief that they rhymed (Irish) rats to 
death. As Yoic Like It, iii, 2. 
P. 77. " No power to occupy." Proof that this last word was used in 
the sense of to use or be busied with, from which general use it came 
to be employed as common slang for a disreputable and vile using. 
P. 170. " Chattering of pies and haggisters." A haggister is the 
Kentish term for a pie, or magpie. The passage explains why 
Duncan (i, 5) is not welcomed by these, but by the ill-omened raven 
that is hoarse with croaking his approach. W. Perkins on Witchcraft, 
works, ed. 1613, says : " When a raven stands on a high place and 
looks a particular way and cries, a corse comes thence soon."

--- PAGE 645 ---
Shakespeare No tings. 547 
P. 187. "A thousand for one that fell out contrary." We would 
more correctly write — " A thousand that fell out contrary for one that 
fell out rightly or correctly." But this and others are examples of 
what we would call a more than loose way of expressing oneself, 
though then it was allowable, for Scot was an educated and intelli- 
gent man, who wrote well. " Each putter out of five for one", 
Tempest^ iii, 2, is an almost exactly similar instance. The putting out 
of five for one is considered as one action, and is — pace Uyce — the 
receiving, as Rlalone says, at the rate of five for one, the putter out 
being he who puts out in the hope of receiving five for one. 
P. 212. " The blind man ... in killing the crow." Green's De- 
fence of Cony-Catchi7ig, p. 70, ed. Grosart, gives this proverbial 
saying — "as blinde men shoote the crowe". Havilet, 4to., 1603, has 
the variant — "as the blinde man catcheth the hare". 
"A green silk curtain." These words, also in Middleton's Witch, 
i, 2, illustrate the custom which led Sir Toby (Tu. A"., i, 4) to say, 
"Wherefore have these gifts a curtain before 'em ? Are they like to 
take dust like Mistress Moll's picture ?" And these last words, by the 
way, prove that this same Moll had, for her own purposes, the portrait 
exposed in some painter's shop, or painters' shops, or rather free 
fronts, without a curtain. 
P. 269. " If a soule wander ... by night." Proof that the wan- 
dering of Hamlet's father's ghost was strictly in accordance with 
traditional folk-lore. So, p. 462, we have, " How common an opinion 
. . . reveale their estate"; and p. 535, "They affirme . . . soules of 
saints". 
P. 347. " Bodkin." The text and margin show that this was used for 
a small dagger, and the woodcut on the next page that it was some- 
times at least a rod-like and pointed weapon. Being thus shaped it 
was small, more easily carried at the waist, and less readily broken 
either by a bone or by an adversaria's stroke. 
P. 382. ^^Beliall." This goes to show that he was " the other devil"' 
whose name had escaped Macbeth's porter. Its being less common 
in men's and preachers' mouths would account for his non-remem- 
brance. 
P. 416. '^Ltgjmm aloes J'' Against any argument drawn from the 
italic use of Hews in Son. 20, and its not being italicised in its first 
use in the same line, nor anywhere else in Shakespeare, the fact 
that Allocs appears in The Lover's Complaint, as well as do other 
words in the Sonnets, has been brought forward. But without 
entering in detail into the question, I would note that three sub- 
stantives, all names of vegetables, are here mentioned, and that this 
alone is placed in italics. So, in the Appendix II, 1665, pp. 67-8, we 
have a number of aromatics named, but this only, and only on its 
second occurrence, is with Spernia Ceti placed in italics — the reason, 
I presume, being, that as a medicine, a more strange and less-known 
name to the commonalty, and a Latin one, it was treated as a quoted 
proper name. 
P. 497. "He burned his booke." A precedent, as was Acts ix, 19, 
for Prospero's " I'll drown my book", when he left his island.

--- PAGE 646 ---
54S Shakespeare Notings. 
p. 498. " Bicause they want." One example, among many, from 
Elizabethan and present authors, and from provincial use, where 
want = "be", or "are without". This in part explams Macbeth, iii, 
6, where Lennox exclaims, "Who cannot want the thought.'"' The 
true difficulty lies in the use of the negative "cannot". But while a 
more correct style would have " can", the more colloquial and hasty 
use of the former was, I think, permissible, just as was the use of the 
double negative where it was not meant to be, as it usually was, 
emphatic. Moreover, it gives here a double or ambiguous sense, 
such as, I think, Lennox wanted to express. 
P. 504. " One instant or pricke of time." Illustrates somewhat 
differently than I think is usually explained, " the prick of noon". R. 
atid Jul., and other places. 
P. 516. "Diverse shapes and forms." Shakespeare follows this 
ruling when he makes Ariel and his co-spirits assume different shapes, 
though some modern critics find fault because he being on some 
occasions invisible, these changes are, in their opinion, unnecessary. 
But the appearance of these spirits, sometimes as invisible, sometimes 
as visible, sometimes in spirit form, sometimes as Juno or Ceres, 
sometimes as harpies, is not only in accordance with the then beliefs 
as to airy spirits, but to me, and to those who have seen their repre- 
sentatives, it is more pleasant to see them in forms appropriate to 
their office, besides bringing their spiritual existence and power more 
vividly before us. Critics here, as well as elsewhere, too often insist 
on considering Shakespeare as the author of books to be read, and 
not of plays to be acted and seen. 
P. 518. " This devil Beelzebub." So seems to have thought Mac- 
betli s porter. 
P. 520. " I'he cruell angel." Here in Prov. 17 [ii] we have one of 
the principles on which Macbeth was planned and executed. 
P. 533. " Soules appeare oftenest by night; . . . never to the whole 
multitude, also may be seene of some[,] and of some other in that 
presence not seene at all." Here is proof of the folk-lore correctness 
of the ghost appearing only when Marcellus and Bernardo were alone 
on watch, and of his being afterwards invisible to the Queen in her 
own chamber, though visible to Hamlet while there in obedience to 
her summons. 
Appendix II, p. 46, par. 8. "But it is rarely known.'^ Though this 
is after Shakespeare's time, the belief, in all probabihty, was in exist- 
ence in his day, and shows how the writer of the first and unknown 
Hamlet followed in Ha7nlefs ghost the beliefs of his day. 
" Feature.^' An example of its being used for the make of a man, 
and not merely of the features of his countenance, to which it is now 
appropriated ; but till I can find — and as yet I have found none, 
though I have looked out for it — an example of feature used for things 
inanimate, I cannot accept the interpretation of song or sonnet m 
Touchstone's As You Like It, iii, 3, 3. Feature here, as any shape or 
proportions, is perfectly intelligible. Did it refer to verse we should 
expect "features". From no man, as Touchstone is depicted by Shake-

--- PAGE 647 ---
Shakespeare Notings. 
549 
speare, could we less expect verse-making, and all his reference to it 
in this passage may readily have arisen from his reference to his new- 
situation as like that of the honest poet Ovid among the Goths. Had 
he been poetical and given her verses, he could not have explained 
to Aubrey that he, being a poet, only feigned to love her. 
P. 198. " Primus seLU?tdus." This goes far to show — proves, I 
think — that the Clown's " Prime, secundo, tertio is a good play" {Tw. 
JV., V, i), a passage on which no commentator known to me has 
touched, thinking it a merely jocular remark, is, in fact, taken from a 
well-known "play" or game. What the game was is unknown to me, 
but children still use various numerals, provincial or otherwise, 
mingled with rhyme, to settle anything, as, for instance, who shall 
hide in the game of hide and seek. 
P. 471. "Biggins." Shows, as does 2 Hy. IV, iv, 5, 27, that, if not 
nightcaps, they meant, among other significations, caps worn at night 
and in bed, and that " homely" was not a generic epithet. 
Introd. Rainolde Scot's Will "bank or pond". I note this because 
it may possibly help to some future interpretation of Iris's words in 
the Tem;pest, iv, i, 64, "The banks with pioned . . . brims."

