ke any more of this popish '[^'"orum 
stuffe, you may go to the verie masse booke, and find manie good 
receipts : marrie if you search Ditrandiis, &c ; you shall find 
abundance. 
I know that all these charmes, and all these palterie confections 
(though/ they were farre more impious and foolish) will be mainteined 173. 
and defended by massemongers, even as the residue will be by witch- 
mongers : and therefore I will in this place insert a charme, the 
authoritie wherof is equall with the rest, desiring to have their Pom.ser- 
opinions herein. I find in a booke called Pomcerinm sermo7itim quad- 
ragesimalitetti, that S. Francis seeing Rufintis] provoked of the divell 238. 
to thinke himselfe damned, charged Rufinus to saie this charme, when 
he next met with the divell ; Aperi os, (Sr» ibi imponam stircus, which is

--- PAGE 290 ---
192 
. Booke. 
The discoverie 
I.. Vairus. lib. 
fascin. 3. 
cap. 10, 
Jdiin, ihid. 
Idem, ibid. 
as much to saie in English as, Open thy mouth and I will put in a 
plumme : a verie ruffinlie charme. 
Leonard Vairus writetli, De verts, pus, ac Sanctis amuletis fascitium 
atq; omnia veneficia destrue7itibns ; wherein he speciallie com- 
mendeth the name of Jesus to be worne. But the sacrament of con- 
fession he extoUeth above all things, saieng, that whereas Christ with 
his power did but throwe divels out of mens bodies, the preest 
driveth the divell out of mans soule by confession. For (saith he) 
these words of the preest, when he saith. Ego te absolvo, are as 
effectuall to drive awaie the princes of darknes, through the mightie 
power of that saieng, as was the voice of God to drive awaie the 
darknes of the world, when at the beginning he said. Fiat lux. He 
commendeth also, as holesome things to drive awaie divels, the sacra- 
ment of the eucharist, and solitarines, and silence. Finallie he saith, 
that if there be added hereunto &n Agnus Dei, and the same be worne 
about ones necke by one void of sinne, nothing is wanting that is 
good and holesome for this purpose. But he concludeth, that you 
must weare and make dints in your forhead, with crossing your selfe 
when you put on your shooes, and at everie other action, &c : and 
that is also a present remedie to drive awaie divels, for they cannot 
abide it. 
The eleventh Chapter. 
0/ the noble babne used by Moses, apishlie counterfeited in the 
church of Rome. 
HE noble balme that Moses made, having indeed manie 
excellent vertues, besides the pleasant and comfortable 
savour thereof ; wherewithall Moses in his politike lawes 
enjoined kings, queenes, and princes to be annointed in 
their true and lawfull elections and coronations, untill the everlasting 
2jg. king had put on/ man upon him, is apishlie counterfeited in the 
Romish church, with diverse terrible conjurations, three breathings, 
crossewise, (able to make a quezie stomach spue) nine mumblings, 
and three curtsies, saieng thereunto, Ave sanctum oleum, ter ave 
sanctum balsatnum. And so the divell is thrust out, and the Holie- 
ghost let into his place. But as for Moses his balme, it is not now to 
be found either in Rome or elsewhere that I can learne. And accord- 
ing to this papisticall order, witches, and other superstitious people 
follow on, with charmes and conjurations made in forme ; which 
manie bad physicians also practise, when their learning faileth, as 
maie appeare by example in the sequele./

--- PAGE 291 ---
of V\^itcJicraft. 
Chap. 15. 193 
The twelfe Chapter. 
173. 
The opinion of Ferrarius touching char7nes, periapts, appensions, 
amulets, &^c. 0/ Homericall medicines, 0/ constant opinion, and 
the effects thereof. 
RGERIUS FERRARIUS, a physician in these daies of 
great account, doth saie, that for somuch as by no diet 
nor physicke anie disease can be so taken awaie or ex- 
tinguished, but that certeine dregs and relikes will 
remaine : therefore physicians use physicall alligations, appensions, 
periapts, amulets, charmes, characters, &c, which he supposeth maie 
doo good ; but harme he is sure they can doo none : urging that it is 
necessarie and expedient for a physician to leave nothing undone that 
may be devised for his patients recoverie ; and that by such meanes 
manie great cures are done. He citeth a great number of experiments 
out of Alexander Trallianus, Aetius, Octaviames, Marcellus, Philo- 
dotus, Archigines, Philostratus, Plinie, and Dioscorides ; and would 
make men beleeve that Galeji (who in truth despised and derided all 
those vanities) recanted in his latter daies his former opinion, and all 
his invectives tending against these magicall cures : writing also a 
booke intituled De Homerica medicatione, which no man could ever 
see, but one Alexander Tralliamcs, who saith he saw it :/ and further 
affirmeth, that it is an honest mans part to cure the sicke, by hooka 
or by crooke, or by anie meanes whatsoever. Yea he saith that Galen 
(who indeed wrote and taught that Incanta77ienia stmt jnuliercularuni 
fgtnenta, and be the onlie clokes of bad physicians) affirmeth, that 
there is vertue and great force in incantations. As for example (saith 
Tralliafi) Galeti being now reconciled to this opinion, holdeth and 
writeth, that the bones which sticke in ones throte, are avoided and 
cast out with the violence of charmes and inchanting words ; yea and 
that thereby the stone, the chollicke, the falling sicknes, and all fevers, 
gowts, fluxes, fistulas, issues of bloud, and finallie whatsoever cure 
(even beyond the skill of himselfe or anie other foolish physician) is 
cured and perfectlie healed by words of inchantment. Marie M. 
Ferrarius (although he allowed and practised this kind of physicke) 
yet he protesteth that he thinketh it none otherwise effectuall, than 
by the waie of constant opinion : so as he affirmeth that neither the 
character, nor the charme, nor the witch, nor the devill accomplish 
the cure ; as (saith he) the experiment of the toothach will manifestlie 
declare, wherein the cure is wrought by the confidence or diffidence 
C C 
Arg. Fer. lib. 
de medendi 
tnethcdo. 2. 
cap. II. 
Dc Homerica 
medicatione. 
240. 
This would 
be exami- 
ned, to see 
if Galen be 
not slande- 
red.

--- PAGE 292 ---
I 9^]. 12. Books. 
TJie discoven'e 
as well of the patient, as of the agent ; according to the poets 
saieng : 
Nos habitat non tai-tara, sed nec sidera coeli, 
Spiritiis in nobis qni viget ilia facit. 
Englished by j\[ot hellish fiiries dwell in us, 
Abraham • i ■ n 
Fleming. Nor starres with injlitence heavenlie ; 
The spirit that lives and rides in ns, 
Doth every thing ingeniouslie,' 
174. This (saith he) commeth to the unlearned, through the opinion 
which they conceive of the characters and holie words : but the 
learned that know the force of the mind and imagination, worke 
miracles by meanes thereof ; so as the unlearned must have externall 
helps, to doo that which the learned can doo with a word onelie. He 
saith that this is called Homerica medicatio, bicause Homer dis- 
covered the bloud of the word suppressed, and the infections healed 
by or in mysteries. 
The xiii. Chapter. 
Of the effects of avmlets, the drift of Argerius Ferrarius in the 
commendation of charvies, Sf'c : foure sorts of Homericall medi- 
cines, the choice thereof j of imagination. 
!S touching mine opinion of these amulets, characters, and 
I such other babies, I have sufficientlie uttered it elsewhere: 
1 and I will bewraie the vanitie of these superstitious 
I trifles more largelie hereafter. And therefore at this 
time I onelie sale, that those amulets, which are to be hanged or 
carried about one, if they consist of hearbs, rootes, stones, or some 
other metall, they male have diverse medicinable operations ; and 
by the vertue given to them by God in their creation, male worke 
strange effects and cures : and to impute this vertue to anie other 
matter is witchcraft. And whereas A. Ferrarius commendeth cer- 
teine amulets, that have no shew of physicall operation ; as a naile 
taken from a crosse, holie water, and the verie signe of the crosse, 
with such like popish stuffe : I thinke he laboureth thereby rather to 
draw men to poperie, than to teach or persuade them in the truth of 
physicke or philosophic. And I thinke thus the rather, for that he 
himselfe seeth the fraud hereof ; confessing that where these magicall 
physicians applie three seeds of three leaved grasse to a tertian ague, 
and foure to a quartane, that the number is not materiall.

--- PAGE 293 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 14. 
But of these Homericall medicines he saith there are foure sorts, 
whereof amulets, characters, & charmes are three : hovvbeit he com- 
mendeth and preferreth the fourth above the rest ; and that he saith 
consisteth in illusions, which he more properlie calleth stratagems. 
Of which sort of conclusions he alledgeth for example, how Philodoins 
did put a cap of lead upon ones head, who imagined he was headlesse, 
whereby the partie was delivered from his disease or conceipt. Item 
another cured a woman that imagined, that a serpent or snake did 
continuallie gnaw and / teare hir entrailes ; and that was done onelie 
by giving hir a vomit, and by foisting into the matter vomited a little 
serpent or snake, like unto that which she imagined was in hir bellie. 
Item, another imagined that he alwaies burned in the fier, under 
whose bed a fier was privilie conveied, which being raked out before 
his face, his fancie was satisfied, and his heate allaied. Hereunto 
perteineth, that the hickot is cured with sudden feare or strange 
newes : yea by that meanes agues and manie other strange and 
extreame diseases have beene healed. And some that have lien so 
sicke and sore of the gowt, that they could not remove a joint, 
through sudden feare of fier, or ruine/ of houses, have forgotten their 
infirmities and greefes, and have runne awaie. But in my tract 
upon melancholic, and the effects of imagination, and in the discourse 
of naturall magicke, you shall see these matters largelie touched. 
Foure sorts 
of Homeri- 
call medi- 
cines, and 
which is 
the prin- 
cipall. 
242. 
The force 
of fixed 
fansie, opi- 
nion, or 
strong con- 
ceipt. 
175. 
The xiiii. Chapter. 
Choice of Charmes against the falling evill, the biting of a mad 
dog, the stinging of a scorpion, the toothach, for a woman in 
travell^for the Kings evill, to get a thortie out of any member, 
or a bo7ie out of ones throte, charmes to be said fasting, or at the 
gathering of hearbs, for sore eies, to open locks, against spirits, 
for the bots in a horsse, and special lie for the Duke of Albas 
horsse,for sowre wines, &^c. 
■HERE be innumerable charmes of conjurers, bad physi- 
cians, lewd surgians, melancholike witches, and couseners, 
for all diseases and greefes ; speciallie for such as bad 
phy sicians and surgions knowe not how to cure, and in 
truth are good stuffe to shadow their ignorance, whereof I will 
repeate some. 
For ike falling evill. 
Ake the sicke man by the hand, and whisper these wordes 
softlie in his care, I conjure thee by the sunne and moone,/ 
T

--- PAGE 294 ---
196 I.'. Books. The discoverie 
24J. and by the gospell of this daie dehvered by God to Hubert, Giles, 
Cornelius, and John, that thou rise and fall no more. Otherwise : 
Drinke in the night at a spring water out of a skull of one that hath 
beene slaine. Otherwise : Eate a pig killed with a knife that slew 
a man. Otherwise as foUoweth. 
Ananizapta ferit mortem, diini Icedere qucerit. 
Est tnala mors capta, dtan dicitur Ananizapta, 
Ajtanizapta Dei maic 7niserere ?nei. 
F.ngiish/d by ( Ananizapta sjniteth death, ^ 
FUmin^. J whiles harme intejideth he, f 
■S^This ivord Ananizapta say, ^' 
J afid death shall captive be, V 
( A/ianisapta 0 of God, ) 
have mercie now on me. 
^ Against the biti>ig of a mad dog. 
^lifdt'damon "pUt a silver ring on the finger, within the which these words are 
3. cap. 5. J. graven Habay ^ habar ►J* hebar & saie to the person 
bitten with a mad dog, I am thy saviour, loose not thy life : and then 
pricke him in the nose thrise, that at each time he bleed, -j;:- Other- 
wise : Take pilles made of the skull of one that is hanged, -j]:- Other- 
wise : Write upon a peece of bread, Irioni, khiriora, esser, khiider, 
176. feres ; and let it be eaten by the/ partie bitten. Otherwise : O rex 
gloria; Jesti Chris te, veni cum pace : In nomine patris max, in nomine 
filii max, in nomine spiritus sancti prax : Gasper, Melchior, Balthasar 
►J< prax ^ max 4* Deus I max ^ 
But in troth this is verie dangerous ; insomuch as if it be not 
speedilie and cunninglie prevented, either death or frensie insueth, 
through infection of the humor left in the wound bitten by a mad 
dog : which bicause bad surgions cannot cure, they have therfore 
used foolish cousening charmes. But Dodonceus in his herball saith, 
that the hearbe Alysson cureth it : which experiment, I doubt not, 
will proove more true than all the charms in the world. But where 
he saith, that the same hanged at a mans gate or entrie, preserveth 
him and his cattell from inchantment, or bewitching, he is overtaken 
with follie./ 
244. \ Against the biting of a scorpioii. 
s 
Aie to an asse secretlie, and as it were whispering in his eare ; 
I am bitten with a Scorpion.

--- PAGE 295 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 14. 197 
• That i 
1[ Against the toothach. 
SCarifie the gums in the greefe, with the tooth of one that 
hath beene slaine. -i'f OihGrmse : Galbes galbat, guides galdat. 
■ilk Otherwise : A ab hiir hits, &c. Otherwise : At saccaring of 
masse hold your teeth togither, and say * Os noii comminueiis ex eo. Yo'u' sha'ii 
^It- Otherwise : strigiles falcesqj dentatce, deniiian dolorejn persanate ; ""dim^n'ish 
O horssecombs and sickles that have so many teeth, come heale me a bone of 
now of my toothach. 
^ A char)iie to release a luoinatt in travell. 
THrowe over the top of the house, where a woman in travell 
lieth, a stone, or any other thing that hath killed three living 
creatures ; namelie, a man, a wild bore, and a she beare. 
^ To heale the Kings or Qjieenes evill, or any other sorenesse in 
the throte. 
REmedies to cure the Kings or Oueenes evill, is first to touch 
the place with the hand of one that died an untimelie death. 
■}> Otherwise : Let a virgine fasting laie hir hand on the sore, and 
sale ; Apollo denieth that the heate of the plague can increase, 
where a naked virgine quencheth it : and spet three times upon it. 
^ A charnie read in the Romish church, upon saint Blazes dale, 
that will fetch a thorne out of anie place of ones bodic, a bone 
out of the throte, dr'e : Led. 3. 
FOr the fetching of a thorne out of any place of ones bodie, or 
a bone out of the throte, you shall read a charme in the Romish 
church upon S. Blazes dale ; to wit, Call upon God, and remember 
S. Blaze. This S. Blaze could also heale all wild beasts that were 
sicke or lame, with laieng on of his hands : as appeareth in the 
lesson red on his dale, where you shall see the matter at large./ / 
^ A charme for the headach. 2^j. ITI, 
'■J^Ie a halter about your head, wherewith one hath beene hanged. 
f A charme to be said each morning by a luitch fasting, or at least 
before she go abroad. 
THE fier bites, the fier bites, the fier bites ; Hogs turd over it, 
hogs turd over it, hogs turd over it ; The father with thee, the

--- PAGE 296 ---
198 12. Booke. The discoverie 
Sonne with me, the holie-ghost betvveene us both to be : ter. Then 
spit over one shoulder, and then over the other, and then three times 
right forward. 
^ Another channe that untches use at the gatliering of their 
inedicinable hem'bs. 
Haile be thou holie hearbe 
growing on the ground 
All in the mount ^-Calvarie 
first wert thou foimd, 
Thou art good for jnanie a sore, 
And healest )nanie a nwund, 
In the na)ne of sweete fesus 
I take thee from the ground. 
^ An old luomans charme, wherewith she did micch good in the 
countrie, and grew famous thereby. 
AN old woman that healed all diseases of cattell (for the which 
she never tooke any reward but a penie and a loafe) being 
seriouslie examined by what words she brought these things to passe, 
confessed that after she had touched the sicke creature, she alwaies 
departed immediatclie ; saieng : 
My loafe in my lap, 
my penie in my ptirsse; 
Thou are never the better, 
and I am never the wursse.j 
246. Another like charme. 
A Gentlewoman having sore eies, made hir mone to one, that 
promised hir helpe, if she would follow his advise : which 
was onelie to weare about hir necke a scroll sealed up, whereinto 
she might not looke. And she conceiving hope of cure thereby, 
received it under the condition, and left hir weeping and teares, where- 
with she was woont to bewaile the miserable darkenesse, which she 
doubted to indure : whereby in short time hir eies were well amended. 
But alas ! she lost soone after that pretious jewel!, and thereby 
returned to hir woonted weeping, and by consequence to hir sore 
eies. Howbeit, hir jewell or scroll being found againe, was looked 
into by hir deere friends, and this onelie posie was conteined 
therein 
* Though 
neither the 
hearbe nor 
the witch 
never came 
there. 
Note the 
force of 
constant 
opinion, or 
li.\ed fancy.

--- PAGE 297 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 14 199 
The divell pull out both thine eies, 
And *etish in the holes likewise. 
Whereby partlie you may see what constant opinion can doo, 
according to the saieng of Plato; If a mans fansie or mind give him 
assurance that a hurtfull thing shall doo him good, it may doo so, 
&c. 
A charme to open locks. 
AS the hearbes called Aethiopides will open all locks (if all be TheevisK 
true that inchanters sale) with the help of certeine words: 
so be there charmes also and periapts, which without any hearbs 
can doo as much : as for example. Take a peece of wax crossed in 
baptisme, and doo but print certeine floures therein, and tie them in 
the hinder skirt of your shirt ; and when you would undoo the locke, 
blow thrise therin, saieng ; Arato hoc partiko hoc maratarykin. I 
open this doore in thy name that I am forced to breake, as thou 
brakest hell gates. In nomine patris, Jilii, &^ spii'itjcs sancti, Arnoi. 
178. 
* Spell the 
word back- 
ward, and 
you shall 
soone see 
this sloven- 
lie charme 
or appensi- 
on. 
^ A charme to drive aivaie spirits that haunt anie house. This is c.ii- 
led and 
HAng in everie of the foure corners of your house this sentence counted 
written upon virgine parchment ; * Omnis spiritus laudet ceLian" 
Doininum : ^ Mosen habent iro-bhetas : Exurvat Deus et dissi-l '=^arme. 
^ , ^ ^ ^ ' »Psal. 150. 
pentur iniviici ejus. b Luk. 16. 
e Psa. 64. 
^ A prettie charme or conclusion for one possessed. 
THe possessed bodie must go upon his or hir knees to the church, 
how farre so ever it be off from their lodging ; and so must 
creepe without going out of the waie, being the common high waie, in 
that sort, how fowle and durtie soever the same be ; or whatsoever lie 
in the waie, not shunning anie thing whatsoever, untill he come to the 
church, where he must heare* masse devoutlie, and then followeth 
recoverie. 
^ Another for the same purpose. 
'"T'Here must be commended to some poore begger the saieng 
J- of five Pater nosters, and five Aves ; the first to be said in the 
name of the partie possessed, or bewitched : for that Christ was led 
into the garden ; secondlie, for that Christ did sweat both water and 
bloud ; thirdlie, for that Christ was condemned ; fourthlie, for that he 
was crucified guiltlesse ; and fiftlie, for that he suffered to take awaie 
* Memo- 
randum 
that hea- 
ring of 
masse be 
in no ca^e 
omitted, 
quoth 
Nota.

--- PAGE 298 ---
200 
12. Booke. 
The discoverie 
our sinnes. Then must the sicke bodie heare masse eight daies to- 
gether, standing in the place where the gospell is said, and must 
mingle holie water with his meate and his drinke, and holie salt also 
must be a portion of the mixture. 
Johannes 
Anglicus fx 
Constantino, 
Gualtero, 
Bernardo, 
Gilberto, (ac. 
^ Another to the same effect. 
THe sicke man must fast three daies, and then he with his parents 
must come to church, upon an embering fridaie, and must heare 
the masse for that dale appointed, and so likewise the saturdaie and 
sundaie following. And the preest must read upon the sicke mans 
head, that gospell which is read in September, and in grape harvest, 
after the feast of holie crosse In diebus quattior temporttm, in ember 
daies : then let him write it and carrie it aboute his necke, and he 
shall be cured./ 
179. 
248. 
Barnard, de 
bustis in Ro- 
sar. serm. 
serm. 15. 
^ Atlother charme or witch-craft for the sa?ne. 
THis office or conjuration following was first authorised and 
printed at Rome, and afterwards at Avenion, Anno. 1515. And 
least that the divell should lie hid in some secret part of the/ bodie, 
everie part thereof is named ; Obsecro te fesu Christe, S^c: that is : 
I beseech thee O Lord Jesus Christ, that thou pull out of everie 
member of this man all infirmities, from his head, from his haire, 
from his braine, from his forhead, from his eies, from his nose, from 
his eares, from his mouth, from his toong, from his teeth, from his 
jawes, from his throte, from his necke, from his backe, from his brest, 
from his paps, from his heart, from his stomach, from his sides, from 
his flesh, from his bloud, from his bones, from his legs, from his feete, 
from his fingers, from the soles of his feete, from his marrowe, from 
his sinewes, from his skin, and from everie joint of his members, &c. 
Doubtles Jesus Christ could have no starting hole, but was hereby 
everie waie prevented and pursued ; so as he was forced to doo the 
cure : for it appeareth hereby, that it had beene insufficient for him 
to have said; Depart out of this man thou uncleane spirit, and that 
when he so said he did not performe it. I doo not thinke that there 
will be found among all the heathens superstitious fables, or among 
the witches, conjurors, couseners, poets, knaves, fooles, &c : that ever 
wrote, so impudent and impious a lie or charme as is read in Barnar- 
dhie de bustis ; where, to cure a sicke man, Christs bodie, to wit: a 
wafer cake, was outwardlie applied to his side, and entred into his 
heart, in the sight of all the standers by. Now, if grave authors 
report such lies, what credit in these cases shall we attribute unto the

--- PAGE 299 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 14. 201 
old wives tales, that Sprenger, Institor, Bodine, and others write ? 
Even as much as to Ovids Metamorphosis, Aesops fables, Moores 
Utopia, and diverse other fansies; which have as much truth in them, 
as a blind man hath sight in his eie. 
^ A charjne for the bots in a horsse. 
YOu must both sale and doo thus upon the diseased horsse three 
dales together, before the sunne rising: In nomijie pa^^tris &^ 
fi>^lii spirittcsi^satictij- Exorcizo te verinem per Deitm pa^trem, 
(Sr= fi^lijitn spiritinnt^sanctujn : that is. In the name of God the 
Father, the Sonne, & the Holy-ghost, I conjure thee O worme by God 
the Father, the Sonne, & the Holy-ghost; that thou neither eat nor 
drinke the flesh blcud or bones of this horsse ; and that thou 
hereby maist be made as patient as fob, and as good as S. fohnj 
Baptist, when he baptised Christ in fordan, In nomine pa*^tris &^ 249. 
fi^lii £r= spirittcs ►{< saiicti. And then sale three Pater nosters, and 
three Aves, in the right eare of the horsse, to the glorie of the holie 
trinitie. Do^iniiiiis fili\i(s spiri^ties Marina. 
There are also divers bookes imprinted, as it should appeare 
with the authoritie of the church of Rome, wherein are conteined 
manie medicinall praiers, not onelie against all diseases ofhorsses, 
but also for everie impediment and fault in a horsse : in so much as 
if a shoo fall off in the middest of his journie, there is a praier to 
warrant your horsses/ hoofe, so as it shall not breake, how far so ever 180. 
he be from the Smithes forge. The smiths 
° , will canne 
Item, the Duke of Alba his horsse was consecrated, or canonized, them small 
in the lowe countries, at the solemne masse ; wherein the popes bull, thiTpraier.' 
and also his charme was published (which I will hereafter recite) he 
in the meane time sitting as Vice-roy with his consecrated standard 
in his hand, till masse was done. 
T 
^ A chartne against vineager. 
Hat wine wax not eager, write on the vessell,'* Giestate £r» videte, I'Ps. 33 g Vuig.: 
qiioniam suavis est Dotninus. bia'sphe'-'^ 
D D

