robability ; but beyond the accumulated force of these we cannot go. 
Epitaph on Sir Thomas Scott, as given in the ^''Memorials of the 
Scott Family", a7id also in Picks " Collection of Curious Pieces 
in the World", vol. 3. 
Here lyes Sir Thomas Scott by name ; 
Oh happie Kempe that bore him ! 
Sir Raynold, with four knights of fame, 
Lyv'd lyneally before him. 
His wieves were Baker, Heyman, Beere ; 
His love to them unfayned. 
He lyved nyne and fiftie yeare, 
And seventeen soules he gayned.

--- PAGE 26 ---
Introduction. 
His first wief bore them every one ; 
The world might not have myst her I* 
She was a very paragon 
The Lady Buckherst's syster. 
His widow lyves in sober sort, 
No matron more discreeter ; 
She still reteiynes a good report, 
And is a great housekeeper. 
He (being called to special place) 
Did what might best behove him. 
The Queen of England gave him grace, 
The King of Heav'n did love him. 
His men and tenants wail'd the daye, 
His Kinne and countriet cryed ; 
Both young and old in Kent may saye, 
Woe worth the day he dyed. 
He made his porter shut his gate 
To sycophants and briebors, 
And ope it wide to great estates, 
And also to his neighbours. 
His House was rightly termed Hall 
Whose bred and beefe was redie ; 
It was a very hospitall 
And refuge for the needie. 
From whence he never stept aside, 
In winter nor in summer ; 
In Christmas time he did provide 
Good cheer for every comer. 
When any service shold be doun, 
He lyked not to lyngar ; 
The rich would ride, the poor wold runn, 
If he held up his fingar. 
He kept tall men, he rydd great hors, 
He did write most finely ; 
He used fewe words, but cold discours 
Both wysely and dyvinely. 
His lyving meane,J his charges greate, 
His daughters well bestowed ; 
Although that he were left in debt. 
In fine he nothing owed. 
* Though a paragon, she lived, he would say, a quiet, retired life, obedient 
and loving to her husband. 
t " Countrie", seems not unlikely to be used here, as in the Discoverie not 
unfrequently, and twice in Wood's notice just given, and, as then, for county, 
X "Meane", that is, moderate, midway between the very rich and the poor.

--- PAGE 27 ---
Introduction. 
xvii 
But dyed in rich and happie state, 
Beloved of man and woman 
And (what is yeate much more than that) 
He was envied* of no man. 
In justice he did much excel!, 
In law he never wrangled : 
He loved rellygion wondrous well. 
But he was not new-fangled. 
Let Romney Marsh and Dover saye ; 
Ask Norborne camp at leyseur ; 
If he were woont to make delaye 
To doe his countrie pleasure. 
■But Ashford's proffer passeth all — 
It was both rare and gentle ; 
Tliey would have pay'd his funerall 
T' have toomb'd him in their temple. 
Before returning to Richard and Reginald, we may conclude this 
short notice of their ancestors by mentioning the very probable cir- 
cumstance that the former were, by the female line, descendants of 
John Gower, the poet, as explained in the following table : 
Sir John Pashell==Elizabeth, d. of Richard Wydeville, sister of Earl 
I Rivers, aunt of Edward IV's wife. 
John Pashen,=7=r. Ludovic (Lowys), d. of Th. Gower, ob. circa 1458. 
ob. circa 1472. | 
William, Elizabeth, or Isabel,=pReg. Pynipe. 
ob. 1485, J./. ob. 1485. I 
Anne=Sir John Scot, father of Richard Scot. 
The Pashells, or Pashleys, were descended from Sir Edmund de 
Passelege, a Baron of the Exchequer, who purchased a manor in 
Smeeth in 1319 ; he died 1327. The family resided at Iden, Sussex ; 
and the house there, and the manor in Smeeth, devolved on the 
Scots, Anne Pympe being her father's only child. It is true that John 
Gower, the poet, does not mention any children in his extant will, 
but he was probably seventy-eight when he died ; and, what is 
more to the purpose, his published will was probably only his testa- 
ment, the will or declaration of uses of the land being commonly at 
* "Envied", most probably in its then frequent sense of hated. 
c c

--- PAGE 28 ---
XV271 
Introduction. 
that time a separate instrument. Th. Cower, of Clapham, f^iven above 
as the father of Lowys, was probably the son or grandson of John 
Gower (see Sir Harris Nicolas in The Retrosp. Rev., 2 Sen, ii, 103-17). 
Also Gower the poet is known to have had property in South wark; and 
Th. Gower, of Clapham, refers in his will (1458) to his tenement called 
The Falcon, in Southwark, near the hospital ; and in Manning and 
Bray's Surrey, iii, 623, there is noticed a deed of conveyance dated 
22nd November 1506, of part of the site of St. Thomas's Hospital, in 
Southwark, made by John Scot, of I den, and Anne his wife, daughter 
and heir of John Pashley, who was cousin and heir of John Gower. 
It may be added as curious that Sir Robert Gower, who is believed 
to have been uncle to the poet, was buried in Brabourne church in 
1349 ; his monument, now destroyed, being noticed in Weever. 
On p. 500, Scot speaks of "his kinseman M. Deering", Edw. Dering 
the divine, a writer on theological subjects and chaplain to her 
Majesty; but in what way they were kin I have been unable to dis- 
cover.* 
Returning now to Reginald's father, Richard, the youngest of the 
three sons of that Sir John who died in 1533, we find that he married 
Mary, daughter of Ceo. Whetenall, whose father was sheriff of Kent 
in 1527, and whose family had lived for three centuries at Hextall's 
Place, near Maidstone. She survived her husband ; and being re- 
married to Fulke Onslow, Clerk of the Parliaments, died before him, 
8th October 1582, and was buried, as he afterwards was, in Hatfield 
church, Herts, where a brass to their memory is fixed in the north 
wall of the chancel. Of Richard himself nothing more is known. 
He probably died young, and certainly before December 1554, his 
death being mentioned in the will of his brother Sir Reginald, who died 
on the 1 6th of that month. In this will, failing his own issue — a lapse 
which did not occur — he left his real estate " unto Rainolde Scotte, 
* My mother being a Dering, a daughter of the Thomas that was drowned 
in the West Indies, when trying to reach his vessel H.M.S. Circe, induces 
me to add, through the courtesy of Sir Edw. C. Dering, that a portrait of 
this worthy is still to be seen at Surrenden Dering, and that a family tradition 
has it, that preaching before her Majesty, he had the boldness to tell her, "that 
she had no more controul over her passions than an untamed heifer." He 
was speedily unfrocked, and is said to have emigrated to America, where an 
Edw. Dering is at this moment the head of that branch, and a large land- 
owner in Maine.

--- PAGE 29 ---
Introduction. 
xix 
son and heire of my brother Richard Scotte, dec''", and Rainolde's 
issue failing, it was devised to a more distant branch. Hence, con- 
trary to the table given on page xi, from "The Memorials", "Rainolde" 
was either the only son of Richard, or the only son then living. The 
same conclusion follows from the Inquis. post mortem of Lady 
Wynifred Rainsfoord, taken the 20th March 1 575/6, where Sir Thomas 
Scot and his brothers are said to be co-heirs with Reynold of the lands 
held by her in gavelkind, the sons having one moiety, and Reynold 
the other. 
This Inquisition also gives Reynold's then age as thirty-eight or 
more, the words "et amplius" being, as was, usually at least, done in 
these documents, attached to all the other ages mentioned. Hence 
he was born in or before 1538 (not in 1541), and as, according to 
Wood, he entered Hart Hall, Oxford, when about seventeen, he 
entered it circa 1555 ; the intention that he should do so having been 
probably entertained by Sir Reginald, his uncle, who died i6th 
December 1554, and his expenses borne by his cousin, Sir Thomas. 
I say probably, because we have seen that, failing his own issue, he 
was named by Sir Reginald as the next heir to the estate, and also 
because we know nothing of the circumstances in which his widowed 
mother was left, nor as yet of the date at which she was re-married 
to Onslow. 
On the nth of October he married Jane — not, as stated in "The 
Memorials", Alice — Cobbe, the daughter of an old yeoman family 
long resident at Cobbe's Place, in the adjoining parish of Aldington. 
The entry in the Registers of Brabourne is — 
" M* Reignold Scott and Jane Cobbe 
were maryed the xith of October 1658." 
The only issue of this marriage, the only issue (that at least survived) 
of both his marriages — for the Maria in the table of "The Memorials" 
was the daugher of his second wife by her first husband — was Eliza- 
beth, afterwards married to Sackville Tumor ; and the only issue of 
that marriage, prior at least to Reynold's death in 1599, was Cicely. 
Ehzabeth's birth must have been in or before 1574, for in the Inquis. 
* To this upper portion of the " M " is added a character which may make 
it " Mr." or " Married"; but I have not myself yet seen the entry.

--- PAGE 30 ---
XX 
Introduction. 
post mortem of Reg. Scot generosus in 1602, she is said to be " 28 et 
amplius". The Holy Maid of Kent (mentioned by Scot, p. 26) was 
servant to one of her maternal progenitors, probably to her grand- 
father. 
In this year, 1574, was also published the first issue of his brain, 
his tractate on The Hoppe-Gardoi, the first work, I believe, in which 
not only was the culture of the hop in England advocated, both as 
having been successfully tried by him, and as against its importation 
from Poppering, in Flanders, where its mode of culture, etc., was en- 
deavoured to be kept secret ; but the whole subject of its growth, 
culture, drying, and preservation was gone into in a practical manner, 
and further explained by woodcuts. And here it may be worth noting 
that in this year Reynold was necessarily absent so far from London 
that the publisher inserted this apologetic note : " Forasmuch as M. 
Scot could not be present at the printing of this his Booke, whereby 
I might have used his advise in the correction of the same, and especi- 
allie of the Figures and Portratures conteyned therein, whereof he 
delivered unto me such notes as I being unskilfull in the matter, could 
not so thoroughly conceyve, nor so perfectly expresse as ... . the 
Author, or you .... the Reader might in all poyntes be satisfied 
[etc., etc.]." In the second edition, however, in 1576, it was : ''Now 
newly corrected and augmented," the augmentations increasing the 
book from fifty-three pages, exclusive of the epilogue, to sixty, and 
the corrections including one added and one emended engraving. 
As a matter of curiosity, and as showing that neither the publisher 
nor the author expected a second edition, it may be added that though 
only two years had elapsed, some at least of the wood engravings 
required to be re-cut in almost exact facsimile. A third edition was 
issued in 1578, and from these we can date the commencement of the 
hop harvests in Kent. 
In 1575 he succeeded to one moiety of such part of Lady Winifred 
Rainsford's estate as was held in gavelkind. Possibly, indeed, we may 
place his enjoyment of it earlier, for Lady Rainsford was declared 
insane ; and to this, by the way, I am not disinchned to attribute 
Reynold's prolonged absence from London in 1572, the attendance 
of some one of the family being required, and he, being older than 
the sons of Sir Thomas, and of a junior branch, and a man of busi-

--- PAGE 31 ---
Introduction. 
xxi 
ness, having been chosen or requested to go. And I think we may 
place his loss of that estate between this date and that of 1584, the 
date of the publication of the Witchcraft. At least, in this Discoverie 
occur two passages which, taken together, seem to point to this. In his 
dedication to Sir Th. Scot he says: A vi, " My foot being [not, having 
been] under your table, my hand in your dish, or rather in your pursse" 
— and, A viii : "If they will allow men knowledge and give them no 
leave to use it, men were much better be without it than have it ; 
.... it is, as . . . . to put a candle under a bushell : or as to have 
a ship, and to let hir lie alwaies in the docke : which thing how 
profitable it is, I can sale somewhat by experience." Though it may 
be said that Reynold was a man of business, and, as appears from 
his writings, a man of decision and of unusual intelligence, still 
circumstances may combine to bring disaster as a shipowner on such 
a one, and more especially if he be new to the business. That he did 
in some way lose his " moiety" is shown by the words of his will, for, 
speaking of his second wife, he says, "whome yf I had not matched 
w'^i all I had not dyed worth one groate." Not, improbably, I think, 
it was to the time of his first marriage, or to his widowership, or to 
both, that Wood more especially refers when he speaks of his giving 
himself up to solid reading, etc. 
When his first wife died and when he re-married is as yet unknown 
to us. But this latter could hardly have taken place until the latter 
end, at earliest, of 1584, since in that year he, as already quoted, de- 
scribes himself as, "having his foot under your [Sir Th. Scot's] table", 
etc., or in other words, as being a dependant not worth one groat. Nor 
do we know more of this second wife beyond these slight particulars 
that we gather from Reynold's will : that her Christian name was 
Alice — given in " The Memorials" instead of Jane, to Cobbe, the first 
wife — that she was a widow with a daughter by her former husband ; 
and that she had some land, either in her own right or derived from 
her former husband. That she was a widow at the time of her re- 
marriage is shown by Reynold's bequest of "six poundes thirteene 
shillings foure pence to my daughter in Lawe Marie Collyar for ap- 
parell [? mourning] desiring that her mother's hand be not anie thinge 
the shorter towards her in that respect." Whether Collyar were this 
daughter's maiden name, and therefore the name of her mother's first

--- PAGE 32 ---
XXll 
Introduction. 
husband, or whether it were the name of her own husband, is doubt- 
ful, though from the words just quoted I rather incline to this second 
supposition, and that the husband was not a man of much means. 
With regard to what I have said as to the mother's possession of pro- 
perty, it has been suggested to me by one of good judgment, and a 
solicitor, that Reynold's expression as to not dying worth a groat was 
merely an excuse for leaving the bulk of his property to his wife ; as 
also that these concluding words of the will, and the resistance of pro- 
bate to it made by Elizabeth, his daughter by his first wife, indicate 
the existence of family differences, probably attributable to this second 
marriage having been entered into with one of a social rank inferior 
to his own. I cannot, however, deduce this latter supposition from 
anything we know, neither can I thus interpret the last words of his 
will, nor believe him guilty of such a perversion of the truth. Read- 
ing his will attentively, I think we find that Scot, with his usual fine 
sense of justice, gives all the lands in "Aldington, Ruckinge, and 
Sellinge", which had become his by his marriage with Alice, " to her 
and to her [not to his] heires", while he only gives his lands in Rom- 
ney Marsh and his lease of Brabourne Rectory to her for her life, 
and then the lease at least, which had come to him "from his Cozen 
Charles", to his daughter Elizabeth. Reading the last words of his 
will verbatim, I think it consistent with justice to hold, that though he 
may have obtained these lands in Romney Marsh through the use of 
what had been his wife's former property, but was during his marriage 
his own, he was entitled to leave them to his wife only for her life, 
they then proceeding not, as did the others, to her heirs, but to his. 
I strongly suspect, also, that his casual omission of any directions 
as to whom these Romney Marsh lands were to go after her death 
was the real cause of the probate of the will being resisted by his 
daughter Elizabeth, so as to definitely raise this point. 
Reserving all notice of his Witchcraft till I speak of it under its 
bibliography, I would say that we know little more of his life. The 
Rev. Jos. Hunter, in his Chorus Vatum, states that he was "a Collector 
of subsidies to Q. EHzabeth in 15..., for the county of Kent." Urged 
to inquiry by this, my friend, Jas. Gairdner, Esq., kindly examined 
for me the Exchequer documents in the Public Record Offices, and it 
appears from them that he was collector of subsidies for the lathe of

--- PAGE 33 ---
Introd2iction. 
XXlll 
Shepway in the years 28 and 29 of Elizabeth (1586-87). It may be 
added that, as appears from a previous document, in the same 
class of papers, that Sir Reynold Scot and other Commissioners for the 
collection in the lathe of Shepway, of the first payment of the subsidy 
granted by the Parliament, 37 Henry VIII, had appointed a high 
Collector. Thus we learn the mode of his appointment ; and on look- 
ing through the lists we find that many such were "generosi", though 
the payment was but small. For Scot, forty shillings was deducted 
from the incomings ; and this not as a percentage, but as salary. 
From the same documents we find that he is twice designated 
"armiger", a word agreeing with his 1584 title-page, "by Reginald 
Scot, Esquire", though in the editions of his Hoppe Garden his name 
alone is given. This was for myself an important find; but it will 
suffice here to say that it confirms Hunter's supposition that this 
esquireship was due to his having been made a justice of the peace, 
though as to the date it can only as yet be said that this dignity was 
probably granted between 1578 and 1584. 
In an Accompt of Sir Th. Heaiiage, kni<^Jit^ Treasurer at Warr, 
in the Public Record Offices, and printed by J. Renat Scott in the 
Arch. Canti., vol. xi, p. 388, we find the following entries : 
"Sr Thomas Scott knighte Collonel generall of the footemen in 
Kent for his Entertainment at xiijs iiijd pr diem for xxij dayes begonne 
the xxix*h of Julye and endinge the xix of Auguste the summe of 
xiiij" xiijs iiij'^." 
" Reinalde Scotte Trench mayster for his Enterteinment at iiijs 
pr diem, and clue to him for the same tyme iiiji' viij^." 
" Sf Thomas Scott knighte for Thenterteynem' of Ixiij Wachemen 
& Garders appointed towatche & warde at Uongenesse for xxij dayes 
begonne [etc., as above] at viij the pece pf diem xlvi'' iiijs." 
From the Muster-roll taken on the 25th Jan. 1587-8, and now in the 
possession of Mr. Oliver, it appears that the county had then furnished 
8,201 footmen and 711 horsemen, and that SirThomas was captain of 
the 309 trained foot raised in the lathe of Shepway, with four hundreds 
of the lathe of Scraye and Romney Marsh. Hence his office as Colonel- 
General was not given him — indeed, this is shown by the Accotnpt — 
until the men had been assembled in camp on the 2gth July. In like

--- PAGE 34 ---
xxiv 
Introduction. 
manner the Muster-roll gives Sir Jas. Hales as Captain of the 
Lances ; but in the pay list Th. Scott (a son of Sir Thomas) is 
Captain both of the Light Horse and Lances. With regard to 
"Reinalde", who, under the name of Reginald, appears in the Muster- 
roll as one of the thirteen captains over 1,499 untrained foot, Mr. J. 
Renat Scott, in a note, states that he was a son of Sir Thomas Scott ; 
but though sons of Sir Thomas were also captains, this assertion is a 
guess, unsupported by any known evidence. 
He made his will on the 15th September 1599, and died twenty-four 
days thereafter, on the 9th October. Some say that he was either 
taken ill at Smeeth or died there, probably misinterpreting the words 
of his will ; some also say that he was buried there ; while some think 
that he was buried by the side of and close to Sir Thomas Scott's tomb 
in Brabourne church; but all these, like the supposition of Philipot in 
his Kent Notes, Harl. MS. 3917, fol. 78a, that he erected that tomb, 
are mere guessings, and as such we leave them. 
To the few particulars thus gathered together we are obliged, with 
the exception of two small points, one probable, and the other, I 
think, certain, to confine ourselves. The first or probable point is, 
that as his name appears five times as a witness to family business 
documents between 1566 and 1594, his signature appearing in this 
last year in Sir Thomas's will, he must have kept up familiar inter- 
course with the latter, and was not improbably, in some measure at 
least, his man of business, and possibly his steward. The second 
point, which also goes to confirm this first one, as also to confirm 
the belief that he was made a justice of the peace, as being a person 
whose attainments, if not his position, would render him useful in 
such a post, is one to which I was independently led by his writings, 
and which is, I find, borne out by almost contemporary testimony. 
He who in his Hoppe Garden showed such practical thought and 
foresight, and in his Witchcraft such independence of thought, was 
not a man, especially when married and a father, to live in dependence 
on a cousin. The wording, as well as the tone of his writings, agree 
with this. We find in them traces of legal study, a habit of putting 
things, as it were, in a forensic form, and noteworthy and not unfrequent 
references to legal axioms or dicta, quoted generally in their original 
Latin. The Dedication before his Hoppe Garden, and the first before

--- PAGE 35 ---
Introduction. 
XXV 
his IVitcIicra/f, are to men of high legal rank, judges, in fact, to whom 
he acknowledges his obligations. Referring the reader to these, and 
to the ambiguous sentence in the latter commencing " Finally" (sig. 
A ii), I would also give the words in the latter, where he says, A. v : 
"But I protest the contrarie, and by these presents I renounce all 
protection"; and in the former the legal phraseology is carried on 
throughout in — "and be it also knowne to all men by these presentes 
that your acceptance hereof shall not be any wyse prejudicial! unto 
you, for I delyver it as an Obligation, wherein I acknowledge my selfe 
to stande further bounde unto you, without that, that I meane to re- 
ceyve your courtesie herein, as a release of my further duties which I 
owe," A. iii. v. And in B. v. : " neither reproove me because by these 
presents I give notice thereof." So also he would seem to have been an 
attendant at the assizes ; and if we look to the story, told at page 5, of 
Marg. Simons, we find that he was not only present at the trial, but 
busied himself actively in the matter, talking to the vicar, the accuser, 
about it, advertising the poor woman as to a certain accusation, he 
"being desirous to heare what she could sale for hir selfe", and inquir- 
ing into the truth of her explanation by the relation of divers honest 
men of that parish. In like manner, his Will is written "w* myne owne 
hande" twenty-five days before his death ; and, on inquiring from a 
lawyer, I find that it is drawn up in due legal form, and by one who 
had had a legal training. Lastly, Thomas Ady, M.A., in A Candle in 
the Dark, 1656, alias, A Perfect Discovery of Witches, 1661, a book, 
like Scot's, against the reality of witchcraft, distinctly tells us, p. 87, 
that Scot "was a student in the laws and learned in the Roman Laws", 
the latter being exactly what such a man would be if he had turned 
towards the law as a profession. These considerations appear to me 
conclusive, even though it be added as an argument per contra that 
his name has not been found among the rolls of the Temple, Inner 
or Middle, or in those of Lincoln's or Gray's Inn. 
And in taking leave of this portion of my subject, I cannot but 
reiterate the obligations both the reader and the literary world gene- 
rally are under to Mr. Edmund Ward Oliver. The suppositions as 
to the cause of Scot's loss of his moiety of the estates of Lady Winni- 
fred Rainsford — not, it is believed, a large sum — and as to his law- 
studentship, based as they are on facts stated by Scot or derived from 
dd

