s 
miracles which he did, &c. Naie, is it not written, that Jesus was 
approoved by God among the Jewes, with miracles, wonders 
and signes, &c ? And yet, if we conferre the miracles 
wrought by Christ, and those that are imputed 
to witches ; witches miracles shall 
appeare more common, and 
nothing inferior 
unto his, 
Lavat. de 
sped. 
113. 
Car. de var. 
rem m . 
J. Wier. de 
prccst. dcemon. 
Athanas. de 
humanitate 
verbi. 
154- 
The true 
end of mi- 
racles. 
John 2. 
Act. 2. 2 
John. 5.

--- PAGE 222 ---
7- Booke. 
The discoverie 
An ironi- 
cal! colla- 
tion. 
Mai. male/, 
par. 2. qua. ) 
cap. 14. 
^55- 
Acts. 17. 
Tim. 6, 13. 
Col. I, i6. 
Atkanas. 
symbol. 
Apollo Py- 
tho unca- 
sed. 
114. 
The xvi. Chapter. 
Witches miracles compared to Christs, that God is the creator of all 
things, of Apollo, and of his names and portraiture. 
\ F this witch of Endor had performed that, which manie 
conceive of the matter, it might have beene compared 
with the raising up of Lazarus. I praie you, is not the 
converting of water into milke, as hard a matter as the 
turning of water into wine ? And yet, as you may read in the gospell, 
that Christ did the one, as his first miracle; so may you read in M. 
Mai. and in Bodin, that witches can easilie doo the other : yea, and 
that which is a great deale more, of water they can make butter. 
But to avoid all cavils, and least there should appeare more matter in 
Christs miracle, than the others, you shall find in M. Mai. that they 
can change water into wine: and what is it to attribute to/ a creature, 
the power and worke of the creator, if this be not ? Christ saith. 
Opera quce ego facio netno potest facere. Creation of substance was 
never granted to man nor angell; Ergo neither to / witch nor divell : 
for God is the onlie giver of life and being, and by him all things are 
made, visible and invisible. 
Finallie, this woman of Endor is in the scripture called Pythonissa: 
whereby it may appeare that she was but a verie cousener. For Pytho 
himselfe, whereof Pythonissa is derived, was a counterfet. And the 
originall storie of Apollo, who was called Pytho, bicause he killed a 
serpent of that name, is but a poeticall fable. For the poets sale he 
was the god of musicke, physicke, poetrie, and shooting. In heaven 
he is called Sol, in earth Liber pater, in hell Apollo. He florisheth 
alwaies with perpetuall youth, and therefore he is painted without a 
beard: his picture was kept as an oracle-giver: and the preests that 
attended thereon at Delphos were couseners, and called Pythonists of 
Pytho, as papists of Papa ; and afterwards all women that used that 
trade, were named PythonisscB, as was this woman of Endor. 
But bicause it concerneth this matter, I will breefelie note 
the opinions of divers learned men, and cer- 
teine other proofes, which I find in the 
scripture touching the ceasing of 
miracles, prophesies and 
oracles.//

--- PAGE 223 ---
of Witchcraft. 
The eight booke. 
The first Chapter. 
That miracles are ceased. 
Chap. I. 
LTHOUGH in times past, it pleased God, extraordina- 
rilie to shew miracles amongest his people, for the 
strengthening of their faith in the Messias; and againe at 
his comming to confirme their faith by his wonderful! 
dooings, and his speciall graces and gifts bestowed by him upon the 
apostles, &c: yet we ordinarilie read in the scriptures, that it is the 
Lord that worketh great wonders. Yea David saith, that among the 
dead (as in this case of Samuel) God himselfe sheweth no wonders. I 
find also that God will not give his glorie and power to a creature. 
Nichodemus being a Pharisie could saie, that no man could do such 
miracles as Christ did, except God were with him, according to the 
saieng of the prophet to those gods and idols, which tooke on them 
the power of God ; Doo either good or ill if you can, &c. So as the 
prophet knew and taught thereby, that none but God could worke 
miracles. Infinite places for this purpose might be brought out of 
the scripture, which for brevitie I omit and overslip. 
S. Augustine, among other reasons, whereby he prooveth the 
ceasing of miracles, saith; Now blind flesh dooth not open the eies 
of the blind by the miracle of God, but the eies of our hart are 
opened by the word of God. Now is not our dead carcase raised 
any more up by miracle, but our dead bodies be still in the grave,/ 
and our soules are raised to life by Christ. Now the eares of the 
deafe are not opened by miracle, but they which had their eares shut 
before, have them now opened to their salvation. The miraculous 
healing of the sicke, by annointing, spoken of by S. James, is objected 
by manie, speciallie by the papists, for the maintenance of their 
sacrament of extreame unction : which is apishlie and vainelie used 
in the Romish church, as though that miraculous gift had continu- 
ance till this daie : wherein you shall see what Calvine speaketh in 
his institutions. The grace of healing (saith he) spoken of by S. 
James, is vanished awaie, as also the other miracles, which the Lord 
would have shewed onelie for a time, that he might make the new 
preaching of the gospell mervellous for ever. Why (saith he) doo not 
these (meaning miraclemongers) appoint some Siloah to swim in, 
whereinto at certeine ordinarie recourses of times sicke folke maie 
136. 115. 
Psal. 136. 4. 
Psal. 72. 18. 
Psal. 88. 10. 
Isai. 42. 
John 3, 2. 
Ibid. 7, 16. 
In annotat. 
in Johan. 3. 
Isai. 45. 
A ugust. de 
verbis Dom. 
secundum 
Matth. ser- 
mons. 18. 
James. 5, 14. 
y. Calvin. In- 
stitut. lib. 4. 
cap. 19. sect. 
Idem. ibid, 
sect. 19. 
Isai. 9, 7.

--- PAGE 224 ---
Booke. 
The discoverie 
Acts. 20, 10. 
Idem. ibid, 
nempe J. Cal- 
vine. 
116. 
158. 
Prov. 51. 
H. Card, de 
miracul. 
plunge themselves ? Why doo they not lie a long upon the dead, 
bicause Paule raised up a dead child by that meanes ? Verelie (saith 
he) Jatnes in the miracle to annoint, spake for that time, whiles the 
church still enjoied such blessings of God. Item, he saith, that the 
Lord is present with his in all ages ; and so often as need is, he help- 
eth their sicknesses, no lesse than in old time. But he dooth not so 
utter his manifest powers, nor distributeth miracles, as by the hands 
of the apostles, bicause the gift was but for a time. Calvhie even 
there concludeth thus ; They saie such vertues or miracles remaine, 
but experience saith naie. And see how they agree among them- 
selves. Da7icBiis saith, that neither witch nor divell can worke 
miracles. Giles Alley saith directlie, / that witches worke miracles. 
Calvine saith they are all ceased. All witchmongers saie they con- 
tinue. But some affirme, that popish miracles are vanished and gone 
awaie : howbeit witches miracles remaine in full force. So as S. Loy 
is out of credit for a horsseleach, Maister T. and mother Btingie re- 
maine in estimation for prophets : naie Hobgoblin and Robin good- 
fellow are contemned among yoong children, and mother Alice and 
mother Bungle are feared among old fooles. The estimation of these 
continue, bicause the matter hath not beene called in question : the 
credit of the other decaieth, bicause the matter hath beene looked 
into. Whereof I saie no more, but that S. Anthonies blisse will helpe/ 
your pig, whensoever mother Bungle dooth hurt it with hir cursse. 
And therefore we are warned by the word of God, in anie wise not to 
feare their cursses. But let all the witchmongers, and speciallie the 
miraclemongers in the world answer me to this supposition ; Put 
case that a woman of credit, or else a woman-witch should saie unto 
them, that she is a true prophet of the Lord, and that he revealeth 
those secret mysteries unto hir, whereby she detecteth the lewd acts 
and imaginations of the wicked, and that by him she worketh 
miracles, and prophesieth, &c : I thinke they must either yeeld, or 
confesse that miracles are ceased. But such things (saith Cardane) 
as seeme miraculous, are cheeflie doone by deceipt, legier- 
demaine, or confederacie ; or else they male 
be doone, and yet seeme unpossible, 
or else things are said to be 
done, and never were 
nor can be 
doone.

--- PAGE 225 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 3, 
The second Chapter. 
That the gift of prophesie is ceased. 
HAT witches, nor the woman of Endor, nor yet hir 
famihar or divell can tell what is to come, may plainelie 
appeare by the words of the prophet, who saith ; Shew 
what things are to come, and we will sale you are gods 
indeed. According to that which Salomon saith ; Who can tell a 
man what shall happen him under the sunne ? Marrie that can I 
(saith the witch of Endor to Sanle.) But I will rather beleeve Paule 
and Peter, which sale, that prophesie is the gift of God, and no 
worldlie thing. Then a cousening queane, that taketh upon hir to 
doo all things, and can doo nothing but beguile men : up steppeth also 
mother Biingie, and she can tell you where your horsse or your asse 
is bestowed, or anie thing that you have lost is become, as Samuell 
could ; and what you have doone in all your age past, as Christ did 
to the woman of Sichar at facobs well ; yea and what your errand is, 
before you speake, as EUzcbus did. 
Peter Martyr saith, that onelie God and man knoweth the/ heart of 
man, and therefore, that the divell must be secluded, alledging these 
places ; Solus Densest scrutator cordium, Onelie God is the searcher 
of hearts. And, Nemo scit qucz sunt hominis, nisi spiritus hominis qui 
est in eo, None knoweth the things of man, but the spirit of man 
which is within him. And Salomon sait^, Tti solus nosti cogitaliones 
hominutn, Thou onelie knowest the thoughts of men. And Jeremie 
saith in the person of God, Ego Detis scrutans corda &^ renes, I am 
God searching hearts and reines. Also Matthew saith of Christ, 
fesus autem videns cogitaliones eorum, And Jesus seeing their 
thoughts, who in scripture is called the searcher and knower/ of the 
thoughts in the heart : as appeareth in Acts, i. 6^ 15. Rotn. 8. Matth. 
9. 12. &-= 22. Marke. 2. Luke. b,&r''].&^\\. fohn. i. 2. 6. &^ 13. Apoc. 
2. ^ 3. and in other places infinite. 
The same Peter Martyr also saith, that the divell maie suspect, 
but not know our thoughts : for if he should know our thoughts, he 
should understand our faith ; which if he did, he would never assalt 
us with one temptation. Indeed we read that Samuel could tell 
where things lost were straied, &c : but we see that gift also ceased 
by the comming of Christ, according to the saieng of Paule ; At 
sundrie times, and in diverse maners God spake in the old times by 
our fathers the prophets, in these last dales he hath spoken unto us 
by his Sonne, &c. And therefore I sale that gift of prophesie, where- 
Isai. 41. 
I. Sam. 18. 
Rom. 12. 
I. Cor. 12. 
I. Pet. 1. 
[i/c/. the full stop] 
John. 4. 
159- 
p. Martyr. 
loc. com. 9. 
sect. 17. 
117. 
P. Martyr, 
in loc. comm. 
Hebr. i, 8. 
& 2.

--- PAGE 226 ---
128 
8. Boolte. 
The discoverie 
2. Pet. a. I. 
Zach. 13. 
7. Chrysost. 
in evang. 5 
han. horn. : 
Pet. BUst. 
tpist. 49. 
160. 
Canon, de 
male/. 6" 
maihemat. 
with God in times past endued his people, is also ceased, and counter- 
feits and couseners are come in their places, according to this saieng 
of Peter : There were false prophets among the people, even as there 
shalbe false teachers among you, &c. And thinke not that so notable 
a gift should be taken from the beloved and elect people of God, and 
committed to mother Bttngie^ and such like of hir profession. 
The words of the prophet Zacharie are plaine, touching the ceasing 
both of the good and bad prophet, to wit : I will cause the prophets 
and uncleane spirits to depart out of the land, and when anie shall 
yet prophesie, his parents shall saie to him ; Thou shalt not live, for 
thou speakest lies in the name of the Lord : and his parents shall 
thrust him through when he prophesieth, &c. No, no : the foretelling 
of things to come, is the onelie worke of God, who disposeth all 
things sweetlie, of whose counsell there hath never yet beene anie man. 
And to know our labours, the times / and moments God hath placed in 
his owne power. Also Phavorinus saith, that if these cold prophets or 
oraclers tell thee prosperitie, and deceive thee, thou art made a miser 
through vaine expectation : if they tell thee of adversitie, &c : and lie, 
thou art made a miser through vaine feare. And therefore I saie, we 
maie as well looke to heare prophesies at the tabernacle, in the bush, 
of the cherubin, among the clouds, from the angels, within the arke, or 
out of the flame, &c: as to expect an oracle of a prophet in these dales. 
But put the case, that one in our common wealth should step up 
and saie he were a prophet (as manie frentike persons doo) who 
would beleeve him, or not thinke rather that he were a lewd person ? 
See the statutes Elizah. 5. whether there be not lawes made against 
them, condemning their arrogancie and cousenage : see also the 
canon lawes to the same effect. 
Tkucidid. 
lib. 2. 
Cicer. de di- 
vin. lib. 2. 
118. 
The third Chapter. 
That Oracles are ceased. 
OUCHING oracles, which for the most part were idols of 
silver, gold, wood, stones, &c : within whose bodies some 
saie uncleane spirites hid themselves, and gave answers : 
as some others saie, that exhalations rising out of the 
ground, inspire their minds, whereby their priests gave out oracles ; 
so as spirits and winds rose up out of that soile, and indued those men/ 
with the gift of prophesie of things to come, though in truth they were 
all devises to cousen the people, and for the profit of preests, who 
received the idols answers over night, and delivered them backe to 
the idolaters the next morning : you shall understand, that although

--- PAGE 227 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 3. 
It had beene so as it is supposed ; yet by the reasons and proofes 
before rehearsed, they should now cease : and whatsoever hath 
affinitie with such miraculous actions, as witchcraft, conjuration, 
&c : is knocked on the head, and nailed on the crosse with Christ, 
who hath broken the power of divels, and satisfied Gods justice,/ 
who also hath troden them under his feete, & subdued them, &c. At 
whose comming the prophet Zacharie saith, that the Lord will cut 
the names of idols out of the land, and they shall be no more remem- 
bered; and he will then cause the prophets and uncleane spirits to 
depart out of the land. It is also written; I will cut off thine 
inchanters out of thine hand, and thou shalt have no more soothsaiers. 
And indeed the gospell of Christ hath so laid open their knaverie, 
&c: that since the preaching thereof, their combes are cut, and few 
that are wise regard them. And if ever these prophesies came to 
take effect, it must be upon the coming of Christ, whereat you see the 
divels were troubled and fainted, when they met him, saieng, or 
rather exclaming upon him on this wise ; Fili Dei cur venisti nos 
cricciare ante tetnpus ? O thou sonne of God, whie commest thou to 
molest us (or confound us) before our time appointed ? Which he 
indeed prevented, and now remaineth he our defender and keeper 
from his clawes. So as now you see here is no roome left for such 
ghests. 
Howbeit, you shall heare the opinion of others, that have beene as 
much deceived as your selves in this matter: and yet are driven to 
confesse, that GOD hath constituted his sonne to beat downe the 
power of divels, and to satisfie Gods justice, and to'heale our wound 
received by the fall of Adam, according to Gods promise in Genesis. 
3. The seed of the woman shall tread downe the serpent, or the 
divell. Eusebius (in his fift booke De prcedicatione Evangelli, the 
title whereof is this, that the power of divels is taken awaie by the 
comming of Christ) saith; All answers made by divels, all sooth- 
saiengs and divinations of men are gon and vanished awaie. Item 
he citeth Porphyrie in his booke against christian religion, wherein 
these words are rehearsed ; It is no mervell, though the plague be so 
hot in this citie: for ever since Jesus hath beene worshipped, we can 
obteine nothing that good is at the hands of our gods. And of this 
defection and ceasing of oracles writeth Cicero long before, and that 
to have happened also before his time. Howbeit, Chrysostome 
living long since Cicero, saith, that Apollo was forced to grant, that 
so long as anie relike of a martyr was held to his nose, he could not 
make anie answer or oracle. So as one may perceive, that the 
heathen were wiser in this behalfe than manie christians, who in/ 
times past were called Oppugnatores incantatnentorum, as the English 
S 
161. 
Zach. 13, 2. 
Mich. 5, 12. 
Gen. 3. 
Euseb. lib. 5, 
cap. I. 
Idem. Ibid. 
Porphyr. in 
lib. contra 
Christ, relig. 
Cic. de divin. 
lib. 2. 
J. Chrysost. 
de laud. 
Paul, horn 4. 
162.

--- PAGE 228 ---
1 30 8. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Porphyr. 
writeth 
verses \x\ A- 
pollos name, 
of the death 
of Apollo : 
cited by 
J. Bod. fol. 6 
princes are called Defensores fidei. Plutarch calleth Bceotia (as we 
call bablers) by the name of manie words, bicause of the multitude 
of oracles there, which now (saith he) are like to a spring or foun- 
taine which is dried up. If anie one remained, I would ride five 
119. hundred miles to see it: but in the whole world/ there is not one to 
be seene at this houre ; popish cousenages excepted. 
But Phttarch saith, that the cause of this defection of oracles, was 
the divels death, whose life he held to be determinable and mortall, 
saieng they died for verie age; and that the divining preests were 
blowne up with a whirlewind, and soonke with an earthquake. 
Others imputed it to the site or the place of the planets, which 
when they passed over them, carried awaie that art with them, and 
by revolution may returne, &c. Eusebius also citeth out of him the 
storie of Paji, which bicause it is to this purpose, I will insert the 
same ; and since it mentioneth the divels death, you may beleeve 
it if you list: for I will not, as being assured that he is reserved alive 
to punish the wicked, and such as impute unto those idols the power 
of almightie God. 
[» read Epi^ 
Thamns 
having lit- 
tle to doo, 
thought to 
plaie with 
his compa- 
nie, whom 
he might 
easilie o- 
vertake 
with such 
a jest. 
i6j. 
The fourth Chapter. 
A tale written by manie grave authors, and beleeved by manie wise 
men of the divels death. An other storie written by papists, and 
beleeved of all catholikes, approoving the divels honestie, con- 
science, and courtesie. 
LUTARCH saith, that his countriman *Epotherses told 
him, that as he passed by sea into Italic, manie pas- 
sengers being in his bote, in an evening, when they were 
about the ilands Echinadce, the wind quite ceased: and 
the ship driving with the tide, was brought at last to Pare. And 
whilest some slept, and others quaft, and othersome were awake (per- 
haps in as ill case as the rest) after supper suddenlie a voice was 
heard calling, Thamus ; in such sort as everie man marvelled. This 
Thamus was a pilot,/ borne in Aegypt, unknowne to manie that were 
in the ship. Wherefore being twise called, he answered nothing; but 
the third time he answered : and the other with a lowder voice com- 
manded him, that when he came to Palodes, he should tell them that 
the great God Pa7i was departed. Whereat everie one was astonied 
(as ^/zV/z^rj^j- affirmed ) And being in consultation what were best 
to doo, Thamus concluded, that if the wind were hie, they must passe 
by with silence; but if the weather were calme, he must utter that

--- PAGE 229 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 4. 
which he had heard. But when they came to Palodes, and the wether 
calme, Thamus looking out toward the land, cried alowd, that the 
great god Pan was deceased: and immediatlie there followed a 
lamentable noise of a multitude of people, as it were with great 
woonder and admiration. And bicause there were manie in the ship, 
they said the fame thereof was speedilie brought to Rome, and Thamus 
sent for by Tiberius the Emperour, who gave such credit thereto, that 
he diligentlie inquired and asked, who that Pan was. The learned men 
about him supposed, that Pan was he who was the sonne of Mercicrie 
and Penelope, &c. Eusebius saith, that this chanced in the time of 
Tiberius the Emperor, when Christ expelled all divels, &c. 
Paulus Marsus, in his notes upon Ovids Fasti, saith, that this voice 
was/ heard out of Paxe, that verie night that Christ suffered, in the 
yeare of Tiberius the nineteenth. Surelie, this was a merrie jest 
devised by Thajnus, who with some confederate thought to make sport 
with the passengers, who were some asleepe, and some droonke, and 
some other at plaie, &c: whiles the first voice was used. And at 
the second voice, to wit, when he should deliver his message, he 
being an old pilot, knew where some noise was usuall, by meanes 
of some eccho in the sea, and thought he would (to the astonish- 
ment of them) accomplish his devise, if the wether prooved calme. 
Whereby may appeare, that he would in other cases of tempests, 
&c: rather attend to more serious busines, than to that ridiculous 
matter. For whie else should he not doo his errand in rough 
wether, as well as in calme? Or what need he tell the divell 
thereof, when the divell told it him before, and with much more ex- 
pedition could have done the errand himselfe ? 
* But you shall read in the Legend a fable, an oracle 1 would/ sale, 
more authentike. For many will say that this was a prophane storie, 
and not so canonicall as those which are verefied by the popes autho- 
ritie : and thus it is written. A woman in hir travell sent hir sister to 
Diana, which was the divell in an idoll (as all those oracles are said 
to be) and willed hir to make hir praiers, or rather a request, to knowe 
of hir safe deliverie : which thing she did. But the divell answered ; 
Why praiest thou to me ? I cannot helpe thee, but go praie to 
Andrew the apostle, and he may helpe thy sister, &c. Lo, this was 
not onelie a gentle, but a godlie divell, pittieng the womans case, 
who revealing his owne disabilitie, enabled S. Andrew more. I 
knowe some protestants will saie, that the divell, to mainteine idola- 
trie, &c: referred the maid to S. Andrew. But what answer will the 
papists make, who thinke it great pietie to praie unto saints, and so 
by consequence honest courtesie in the divell, to send hir to S. 
Andrew, who wold not faile to serve hir turne, &c. 
120. 
A detecti- 
on of Tha- 
mus his 
knaverie. 
164. 
^'Legend, aur. 
hi vita sanc- 
ti A ndrece. 
fol. 39. 
A gentle 
and a god- 
lie divell.

--- PAGE 230 ---
132 
The discoverie 
Athanas. de 
human, ver- 
bi.fol. 55 &• 
64 
165. 
121. 
The fift Chapter. 
The judgments of the ancient fathers touching oracles, and their 
abolishmetit, and that they be now transferred from Delphos to 
Ro7ne. 
HE opinions of the fathers, that oracles are ceased by the 
coming of Christ, you shall find in these places following, 
to wit : Justinus In dialogis adversus Judczos, Athana- 
sius De hiananitate verbi, Augustine De civitate Dei, 
Eusebius Lib. 7. cap. 6, Item lib. 5. cap. i. 8. Rupertus In Joan. lib. 
10. 12. Phitarch De abolitione oraculorum, Plinie lib. 30. natural. 
historicE. Finallie, Athanasius concludes, that in times past there 
were oracles in Delphos, Bceotia, Lycia, and other places : but 
now since Christ is preached to all men, this madnesse is 
ceased. So as you see, that whatsoever estimation in times 
past, the ancient fathers conceived (by heeresaiej of those mira- 
culous matters of idols and oracles, &c : they themselves refuse 
now, not onelie to beare witnesse of ; but also affirme, that ever / 
since Christs comming their mouthes have beene stopped. / 
For the ceasing of the knaveries and cousening devises of preests, 
I see no authoritie of scripture or ancient father, but rather the con- 
trarie ; to wit, that there shall be strange illusions shewed by them, 
even till the end. And truelie, whosoever knoweth and noteth the 
order and devises of and in popish pilgrimages, shall see both the 
oracles & their conclusions remaining, and as it were transferred 
from Delphos to Rome, where that adulterous generation continuallie 
seeketh a signe, though they have Moses & the prophets, yea even 
Christ & his apostles also, &c. 
The sixt Chapter, 
Where and wherein cotiseners, witches, and preests were woont to 
give oracles, and to worke their feats. 
jHESE cousening oracles, or rather oraclers used (I saie) 
to exercise their feats and to doo their miracles most 
commonly in maids, in beasts, in images, in dens, in 
cloisters, in darke holes, in trees, in churches or church- 
yards, &c: where preests, moonks, and friers had laid their plots, and 
made their confederacies aforehand, to beguile the world, to gaine 
monie, and to adde credit to their profession. This 