t." I have placed "him" in the margin, 
my own conjecture and the reading of the British Museum MS. of 
parts of Scot. But in Fletcher's Af. Thomas, iv, 6, we have the same 
spell, with some slight variations, and ending — 
" She would not sth- from him [St. George] that night", 
which more agrees with Shakespeare's quotation in Lear, iii, 4 — St. 
Withold 
"Bid her alight 
And her [the nightmare's] troth plight." 
 "Vidi'rimf, etc. Altered, apparently, from Vulgate, which 
has "Videntes . . . essent pulchras", etc. 
 "Fi'h'osDet." Scot here alters "Fi7n" to the objective, because 
it follows " doo interpret". He does the same elsewhere, whether it 
be English verb or preposition that precedes. Thus, 422, we have 
" Vz7as Patrum", because it follows "prooved"; 458, '■'•'m Specula exem- 
plortan" ; and 381, "in Circulo Salomonis; 544, " Spiritum", because 
the words follow " signifieth". We find one instance of the same in 
Nash's Summers Last Will and Test.

--- PAGE 665 ---
General Notings OTi Scot's Text. 567 
P. 90. " He accuseth." Bodin, ii, 6. 
P. 91. " A faggot maker." Bodin, ii, 6. 
P. 94. " In the western ilands", as in the " still vexed Ber- 
moothes". 
P. 95. " Saccaring bell" = a sacring bell, the bell rung at the 
elevation of the host, when all true, i.e.^ Roman Catholic, worshippers 
fall on their knees. 
 "A morrowe masse" — a morning mass. All masses, except, 
I think, on Christmas Day and Good Friday, and except in certain 
churches, where the older usage was by prescription allowed, being in 
Scot's time, and now, celebrated before noon. This rule was made 
by the Pope in 1550-58. 
P. 99. " (His reason onelie reserved)." Not Bodin's reason, but 
that of the sailor. 
P. 104. "Abacuck." Bel and the Drae:on, 36, 37. 
 " One syllable nor five words." A curiously sounding 
phrase ; but he seems to have used " syllable" as we do, figuratively, 
meaning, " in the same sense", while the five words are, " not even 
differing five words in the form of expression". 
P. 107. " Witch is disposed", [to plague] being understood. 
P. 1 10. " Make so foolish a bargaine or doo such homage to the 
devill." We would more exactly say "bargaine [with] or". 
P. III. " Exod. 22" [18]. Did Scot quote from memory? The 
Sept.,0 ov TToiTjcrere [van] TTEpiftiwaeTe Ox. ed., nor have I found Scot's 
verb as a recognised variant. 
P. 113. "Eccl." is twice in the margin put for " Ecclus.", the 
Apocryphal Book. In p. 145, by, I suppose, a printer's error, " Eccle." 
is put for " Ecclus." Elsewhere, Scot rightly gives " Ecclus." 
P. 115. " Osee 6" [i, 2]. Vulg. has "2. Quia ipse cepit, et sanabit 
nos ; percutiet, et curabit nos. 3. Vivificabit nos post duos dies." 
The " ego", etc., is only found in Deut. xxxii, 39, where the Vulg. has 
" vivere faciam". 
 " If you looke into [what I have written concerning] Hadar", 
etc. 
P. 119. "Besmearing with an ointment." Such beliefs then cur- 
rent justify more than is now supposed the beliefs of Elizabeth and 
her counsellors, and the execution of her would-be murderer. 
 "Wolves doong." A bit of folk-lore, which has, I think, 
sufficient V7-aiseinbla7ice as to be worthy of trial, the more so as it is 
said to this day that a young dog shows fear at the smell of a dried 
piece of wolf's skin. 
P. 126. Eliz. Barton." See Froude's Hist., v, i. She was of 
Aldington, Kent, and a servant of the father or grandfather of Jane 
Cobbe, Reg. Scot's first wife. 
P. 127. " In his mightie power." Either the "in" of the line above 
brought about its insertion here, or, more likely, it was used as it is 
" in his name", though in such a case as this we should say "through" 
or " by". 
P. 132. " 1572." This booklet is not known, I believe ; nor is it in 
the Stat. Regs.

--- PAGE 666 ---
568 
General Notings on Scofs Text. 
P. 142. "Eccle" [Ecclus, 49, 16, 17]. 
p. 145. " Covered himself with a net." An excellent example that 
this phrase meant disguising himself, or trying to conceal himself. 
It may seem odd, that " with a net" should mean this, because one 
naturally thinks of a single fold ; but a fisherman conceals his head 
and body in folds of netting. 
P. 146. " Finger in a hole." I presume it is meant that Saul shut 
himself out of all means of knowing what really went on, as much as 
if he had closed up a hole in a shut door or window-shutter, through 
which alone he could see — or have light thrown upon — the subject. 
P. 147. " She saith to herself" [but intentionally loud enough for 
Saul to hear]. 
P. 150. " Right ventriloquie." This excellent investigation of the 
Bible story might be read with advantage by those who even now 
hold that Samuel really appeared by God's allowance or command. 
Such a belief involves three impossibilities. First, that God having 
repeatedly declined to answer Saul by lawful means, now by an after- 
thought changed His mind. Secondly, that He who from the time of 
Moses had so condemned witchcraft, that Saul had put it down as 
far as he could, and that with blood, now favoured the action of a 
witch, and that in so notorious a case that it could not but be, as it 
was, known to all Israel. Thirdly, that the Deity must have put a 
lying spirit into the mouth of a true and God-blessed prophet, since 
the prophecy did not come true in more than one important point. 
P. 151. "Aias and Sadaias.'" Here he rightly distinguishes the 
two ; but in 141, and in his list of authors consulted, he gives "Rabbi 
Sedaias Haias". " Haias Hai", or "Haja", was a celebrated Baby- 
lonian Rabbi, born 969 a.d.; died 1038. Sedaias or Saadja flourished 
circa 900-40. 
P. 155. "Called Pythonissa." Not by that exact word, either in 
Sept., or Vulg., or Greek N.T. Vulg., i Sam. xxviii, 7, has " mulier 
pythonem habens"; and in Acts xvi, 16, the Greek, the Vulg., and 
Beza have similar wordings. 
 " Liber pater." " Liber" is " Bacchus" in Scot himself ; 
but Porphyrius — whom Th. Cooper and Calepine follow — says of 
" Liber pater": " Eundem Solem apud superos : Liberum patrem in 
terris : Apollinem apud inferos." 
P. 158. " Then a cousening queane"=Than [believe that], etc. I 
note: i. That the (.) before " Then" should probably be a (,), though 
occasionally we have (;) where only (,) is required. 2. That as in this 
book we rarely have " then" for " than", I conjecture that this mode 
of spelling was not at the time universal, but only commencing. 
P. 159. Nemo scitP Slightly altered from the question, i Cor. 
ii, II, and not the Vulgate words, but apparently more those of Beza. 
 " Tu sokes''' [2 Chron. vi, 30]. Vulg. reads, " tu enivi solus 
nosti corda filiorzim hominem"; it has also " corda", where David 
speaks to Solomon similarly, i Chron. xxviii, 9 ; but " universas men- 
tium cogitationes" follows it. 
 " Ego Deus" [Jer. xvii, 10]. He omits "probans^' before 
" renes" in Vulg.

--- PAGE 667 ---
General Notings on Scof s Text. 
569 
P. 162. " Epotherses." Rightly, in 163, " Epitherses". 
P. 166. " By revolution." I presume by revolution of the planets 
(and stars, as was then thought), until they came into a certain "con- 
stellation", i.e., position as regards one another. This I gather from 
a previous page. 
 [Margin] "Zach. 10." We have here a further example of 
the loose references, common in those days, to the Bible made by 
both Roman Catholics and Protestants. The first clause is in sense 
is given Zach. 10 [,2], and somewhat, Isai. 44 [9, 10]; but the remainder 
from Ps. cxxxv, 16, 17; though "months", etc., is placed third instead 
of first, while "let them shew" is, I take it, a variant of Isai. xli, 23. 
P. 168. "Firmament." His error in writing "earth" shows his haste, 
and explains in part the wording of his Scripture quotations. Cf. pp, 
19, 174. But see also note, p. 503. 
P. 169. "The increase of the moon." This, his doubtful doubt as to 
the Remora, his belief that the bone in a carp's head staunched blood, 
show that Scot was not naturally sceptical in matters of knowledge, 
but that he only gave up the beliefs of his day after investigation. 
P. 171. Mahomets dove." He would express his belief, as Wier 
does more openly, that it (as the eagle) was taught to do its feats. 
P. 173. " '?X"'"- In those days the H, now confined to the capitals, 
was used, as here in the original, for the small letter 7. 
P. 174. "Pharaoh the Persian kings." Other references to the 
Pharaohs in this book show that these curious transpositions were due 
to haste of composition and of revisal both of his MS. and of the 
printed copy. 
P. 176. "Manacies." Not having met with this form, I presume 
that it is a press error for "menacies". It is so changed in the second 
edition. 
P. 180. " Faile to dreame by night." Scot's general statement may 
be true, but must in some instances be modified. From my youth, for 
many — say at least twenty — years, I tried to remember my dreams for 
this very purpose, and could remember them for a short while very 
well ; but never could I find that what I had thought on during the 
day, or the days before, gave even a suggestion to my dreams. Thrice, 
however, of late years, I have been able to trace my dream to some- 
thing I had casually thought of, though not meditated on. This 
edition of Scot, as well as the question of witchcraft, has occupied 
both my mind and time since November, and it is now October, yet 
not a single dream has had reference to anything connected with 
these subjects. Similarly, family matters have both busied me and 
worried me for some months, and yet these matters have never in- 
truded themselves, not even when my dreams, and at one time a near 
approach to nightmare, showed that my digestion was out of order. 
From my own instance, I should rather say that dreams most 
frequently seem to be natural reliefs to the thoughts that I had indulged 
in, or that might have beset me, in my waking hours. 
P. 182. "Of physicall dreames." I suppose he means dreams 
from physical causes. 
4D

--- PAGE 668 ---
570 General Notings on Scof s Text. 
P. 182. ^'Mclnncholicall." Proceeding from "black bile", which, in 
the opinions of that day, produced melancholy, that form of madness 
called melancholia. I would add that " melancholy" is often used in 
Scot for mad melancholia, and for the supposed humour melancholy 
or black bile, and that, unless this is borne in mind, some of his 
sentences will be misunderstood. 
P. 183. " De Profundis." Ps. cxxix; Vulg. cxxx ; Prayer Book. All 
that follow are given consecutively, I think, in the Rit. Rom. Officticm 
DefiDictoricm. 
 " Pleasant and certain dreams." Formerly an at least 
English notion, as expressed by the servant-lover of Bombastes : 
" And morning dreams, they say, come true." 
P. 184. " Eleoselinum." Translated in the second edition as 
" mountain parsley." 
 "Slum" in the second edition is "yellow water-cress". 
 " Acarum vulgare", " common acorus" — our " Asarum 
Europ." 
P. 185. "An errand . . . from farre countries." A similar tale is 
told — in some English work against witchcraft after Scot — of an 
Italian judge who thus tried a supposed witch. 
P. 187. "A thousand for one that." Here the "that" does not, as 
with us, refer to the "one'' but to the " thousand" =" he might have 
cited a thousand that fell out contrarie" for one that fell out truly. 
A thousand for one, though four words seem, as it were, to have 
been considered one thought. See Shakespearean noting under this 
page. 
P. 190. " To offer ... to Moloch." Curious that Scot, knowing 
that fire was accounted holy, should not have seen that this idolatrous 
rite was in its essence a purifying, and possibly an expiatory, one. 
P. 198. "Af^;/^/;«j-" (example, Deut. xix, 10). Hebr. EJTlJl/b- Here he 
does not quite agree with Wier, i, § 9. 
 " Philosophers table." Cf. Strutt, s. n. The philosopher's 
game, played on a " table" or board. 
 " Sober writer." Of course, ironical. 
 " Of each letters." Either misprint for letter, or rather, per- 
haps, a loose way of saying "of each [set of] letters", or "of the 
letters of each person's name or names". 
 " Unequal number of vowels." A bit of folk-lore as yet, I 
think, unnoticed. 
P. 200. "Added the Apocrypha." Council of Trent, 1550, made 
them of equal authority with those which the Church of England 
defines as " Canonical Scriptures". 
P. 202. " True loves." Garden pansies, viola tricolor, L. (Britten 
and H.), four-leaved grass, occasional variations of the three- leaved 
grass, trefoil. 
 "To our left side." So far an explanation why horse-shoes, 
salt, etc., are thrown against ill-luck over the left shoulder. 
P. 205. '■'•Sero rubens.'" P. 169, Scot quotes this in English as a

--- PAGE 669 ---
Ge7ieral Notings on Scot's Text. 571 
lawful divining from natural causes, in fact, as a weatherwise obser- 
vation. 
P. 206. "Stella errans." I presume he means a planet, partly be- 
cause a comet was then thought a portent, differing in origin and 
nature from a star, partly because Cicero uses the plural in the sense 
of planets. 
 "A'(?« est." Not from Vulg. or Beza ; probably his own 
rendering. 
P. 209. " Milvus" [Jer. viii, 7]. Sentence as in Vulg., while the 
Geneva version, like our Authorised version, has storke. 
P. 210. " Significators", i.e., of the planets which have meanings 
according to their positions and co-positions or " constellations". 
P. 212. "Sapiens." A sop of flattery for their client. 
P. 213. "Maketh themselves cuckoldes."=Who by their negligence 
and ignorance cause themselves to be made cuckolds, while pretend- 
ing to know every other person's future. 
P. 225. " Phaers Virgil" [B. 4, ad 
Scot, however, has printed 
each line as two. 
P. 230. " Balme", etc. Note that each longer line has an extra 
syllable at the end. 
P. 232. " This is as true a copy." Apparently a press error for 
" This is a true copy", as given in the second edition, the printer hav- 
ing, inadvertently, almost reduplicated the "is". 
-P. 233. " ►J" Thomas." His and our "N." (or sometimes "John", 
etc.), anyone who may be the invoker. 
 " A popish periapt." The distances between these letters 
are somewhat variable, the " ka" and " am" are near enough to be 
syllables. But 1 have not misspent my time in a search for the true 
original. 
P. 234. "Whistle for a pardon." An expression still used for 
other things than pardon. Possibly founded on an ironical reference 
to the nautical idea, that when you whistle for a wind you get it, and 
more of it than you want. 1 have been spoken to for whistling on 
board ship. More probably, however, because whistling denoting 
want of care and thought, as in bench-whistler, one might as well ex- 
pect a pardon or the thing wished for, after merely whistling for it, as 
expect larks to drop into one's mouth. 
P. 238. " Plumme." I know not whether Scot meant to translate 
" Stircus " literally, but it would be curious to know whether this 
signification was formerly given to " plum". It could well bear it. 
P. 240. " Constant opinion "=firm belief or firm faith. 
 '''' Honierica MedicatioP The physician was "Ferrerius", 
alias "Auger", or " Oger Ferrier" — not " Ferrarius", as given through- 
out the text, in his list of authors, and in his contents — born at Toulouse, 
1513, physician in ordinary to Catherine de Medicis, and afterwards 
returned to his birthplace, where he died in 1588. B. 2, ch. ii, of his 
Vera medetidi modus is headed " De Homerica Medicatione". And 
here I would at once say, that for the discovery of "Ferrarius" and 
of the following passages, and of the cause of Scot's curious blunder, 
the reader and myself are indebted to my ever-ready Shakef'^^

--- PAGE 670 ---
572 
General Notings 07i Scot's Text. 
friend, the Rev. W. A. Harrison. " When," says Ferrier, " patients 
will not yield to ordinary treatment, one must have recourse to another 
kind," which he describes generally in the margin as "Amuleta". 
And first he speaks of "appensiones et physicae alligationes", then 
of " Caracteras & Carmina". These, he says, Galen (and Trallianus) 
at first ridiculed, but that Trallian had seen (I beheve in his mind's 
eye) a tractate of Galen's in which, as the heading of a chapter, or 
somewhere else, were the words " Homericam medicationem ; quod 
Homeriis siippressiini verbis sans^uiiiem, et mysteriis sanatos effecttts 
prodideritr The italicised passage is that nonsense-sentence of Scot's 
at the end of the chapter. It could only have arisen from Scot's 
haste, but was also due to the fact that, as in the British Museum 
copy of the Lyons edition, 1574, the "s" of "verbis" is so faint as 
to give the not careful reader the form "verbi". But Ferrier, like 
Scot, attributed such cures to imagination or a " fixed fansie", or "con- 
stant opinion"; on which also I would refer to Sir H. Holland's book 
on the Effect of Imagination in Disease. Thus he continues : " Depre- 
hendiitaquecurationishujus eventum non a caracteribus non ex carmina 
permanare. Sed tanta est vis animi nostri, ut si quid honesti sibi 
persuaserit, atque in ea persuasione firmiter perseveravit, idipsum 
quod concepit agat, & potenter operetur. . . Si neque fidentem, neque 
diffidentem nihilominus vis animi agentis operabatur. Id in dentium 
doloribus . . aperte videre licet. Nam praecantator ita movet non 
reluctantis segroti animum, ut dolor . . . sensim extinguatur. . . At si 
forte asger diffidet, aut plane ridiculum existimet remedium . . prs- 
cantante vis nulla erit. . . Non sunt ergo carmina, non sunt caracteres 
quo talia possunt, sed vis animi confidentis, & cum patiente concordis." 
Wier v, 19, §1-4, gives the Ferrerius quotation, as well as his name, 
rightly. The staunching of blood by words refers to the cure in the 
Odyssey. 
P. 242. " Through sudden feare." Similar cases are known to 
physicians at the present day, whether through fear or some other 
sudden emotion. A Protestant medical man can well believe some 
of the tales of diseased pilgrims cured at, say, the shrine of Our Lady 
of Lourdes, though no more believing in such miracles than do 
Roman Catholics when Protestant anointers anoint and sometimes 
cure through the same cause. 
P. 243. "Hearbe Alysson." So called because it cured hydro- 
phobia (Pliny). Phil. Holland says, " Some take it to be Asperula, 
the wood-rose" ; Holyokes Rider gives " rubia minor, cannabis 
agrestis". 
P. 244. " Scarifie." Might be done with a gum lancet ; but the 
magical tooth might have the advantage in some instances of 
affecting the thoughts, and through them the body, as noted, 
p. 240. 
 " Os non." This, preceded by Jesus autem transiens 
►J< per medium illorum ibat with a after "eo", was, according to 
Paulus Grillandus, who twice witnessed it, a charm producing taci- 
turnity and insensibility under torture ! Something, either this or 
something else, being repeated by the prisoner in an inaudible voice.

--- PAGE 671 ---
General Notings on Scofs Text. 
573 
a scroll containing these words and signs was found " in capite sub 
scruffia scilicet inter crines" (Wier v, 12, §3). 
P. 244. " Throwe." He might have added, " when you have got 
it", before which time she would have been released, if not one way 
yet by another. 
P. 245. " Tye." Is like the "scarifie"; as one generally uses a 
handkerchief. 
P. 248. " That thou hereby . . patient as Job." This is to me one 
of the oddest examples I have seen of the confusion of two or more 
pronouns as to their subject ; for though the " thou" a line above 
clearly refers to the worm, this one cannot refer to anything but to 
the horse ; for after exorcising the worm in the name of the I'rinity, 
he surely would not exhort it to be as " patient as Job " and as " good 
as St. John", particularly as the exorcism was made that the worm 
might be expelled and die. 
P. 251. " Remeeve." An excellent example of the devices had re- 
course to by Elizabethan versifiers to obtain a rhyme. 
P. 257. " Certeine name." I presume this caution is inserted lest 
one hurt Tom instead of Harry. 
 " Each image must have in his hand." For the true read- 
ing cf. "Extracts from Wier". Scot must, I think, have trusted too 
much to his memory. 
 "Domine Dominus", etc. Pss. 8. 27. 102. 109. Prayer Book 
numbering. 
P. 264. "Bladder." Clearly a press error for bladders. 
 ''Ribbes and genitals." Conjoined, apparently, from a re- 
membrance of the procreation of Eve, Genesis ii, 21, 22. 
P. 265. "Sir John . . . pulpit." As the story was told of "as 
honest a man . . . whereof mention was lately made", he was of the 
Church of England ; see under p. 461 for "Sir". And since, I have 
found that Bishop Hutchinson in his Dedication calls him Sir John 
(jrantham. Seemingly we thus have evidence of the dress in the 
pulpit; but one unwilling to be convinced might retort that the very 
mention of his sacerdotal dress is proof that he went into the pulpit 
exceptionally attired, and not to preach, but to perform a quasi-sacer- 
dotal office. 
P. 266. "Hundred and eight." Here, from the "sayers of the 
charm", the authority is, in all probability, the Vulg. Its 108 is our 
109, Scot not having in this instance changed the numbering. 
 "Seachers." Probably "Sea[r]chers", as given in the second 
edition, but it may have been a form of seekers, since seche=seek. 
 " Horsse shoo." This superstition probably had its origin 
from Stonehenge times and before, since the inner stones there, 
apparently the more sacred portion, and, so far as one can now judge, 
the corresponding part at Avebury, each form a horse-shoe. Sir H. 
James first, I believe, noticed the true shape at Stonehenge, and I 
afterwards independently observed it, both there and then at Avebury, 
and connected it with this horse-shoe superstition in I'/ie Antiquary^ 
vol. ii, Oct. 1880. 
 " Alicium.'" Have not as yet found this. '

--- PAGE 672 ---
574 General Notings on Scot' s Text. 
p. 267. "Herbe betonica." "Stachys betonica", Plin., b. 25, c. 8. 
 "Pullein", etc. "Verbascum" ; "Thapsus", L., "bullock's 
lungwort" (Kent). Tusser, like Scot, calls it "Longwort", a variant 
of " Lungwort". 
P. 268. "Baccar." "Nardum rusticum", or, according to Sprengel, 
"Valeriana Celtica", L. ; others "foxglove", or "asarabacca". 
 "Browze". Gives us the meaning of Bowze^boughs, it 
being so spelt to accord, as was the custom, not only in rhyme but in 
spelling. 
 "Vervain." "Verbena officinalis", L. (and other verbenas ?), 
used, according to Park, "against poison, venom of beasts, and be- 
witched drinks". 
 " Palma." Willows in England were used as the palm on 
Palm Sunday ; sometimes the yew; but here I incline to think he 
means Palma Christi, a flat-hand rooted orchis. 
 "Antirchmon." I suspect a misprint for "antirrhinum", 
calf s snout, snap-dragon, A — . Linn. Pliny, b. 25, c. 8, says it is much 
esteemed by enchanters, 
 "Lappoint." Minshen gives "Lapouin", as the French 
for lapwing, but I have been unable to find this word. Wier v, 21 § 6, 
says, as Scot, "Dicuntur & pennse upupas suffitse, phantasmata 
fugare", and the upupa, then as now, was taken to' be the lapwing, 
though Th. Cooper says, "Wherefore [from his crest as described] 
it cannot be our lapwing ... it is rather ... an Houpe" [hoopoe], 
which it is likely from the names, both being onomatopeiatic. The 
daughter of the vicar of Oare, near Faversham, Kent, Miss K. P. 
Woolrych, says that an old man, when young, heard lappoint as the 
common name for the still-abounding lapwing. 
P. 269. "Cleave an oken branch." One is tempted to think this bit 
of folk-lore is a reminiscence of Druidical times. 
P. 271. " Ps. Exaltaboy Ps. 245, Pr. B. vers. 
P. 273. " Nameles finger." Wier, "innominatum". From this last, 
which is not so much nameless as "unhappy", etc., I think the middle 
finger is meant, "digitus impudicus", "famosus", "infamis", under 
which latter epithet, cf. Persius, Sat. ii, for the reason. At 325 he 
calls the middle finger the long, and at 326 the middle, at 329 the 
longest finger. 
P. 275. "Made room." Gave occasion or opportunity. 
P. 284. ^^FmalHe." This is in italics, the mark of a quotation, but 
it is not from the Rhemish Test, of 1582, given as one of the books he 
consulted, nor have I yet found from what Protestant version he took 
it. 
P. 289. "Eccle. I. & I." Probably a press error for 1 & 13, the 
words being a remembrance of the sense of verses 13 and 17. It is 
not Ecclus. 
P. 294. "The corral." Can we see in this the origin of the almost 
universal coral for children when teething ? 
 " Dinothera." Cannot find it. 
 "Aitites." Properly "Aetites", a stone said to be found in 
the eagle's nest. Plin., b. 7, c. 3.

