rtues and powers, I conjure and 
constreine the spirit of A^. that now immediatlie thou be obedient 
unto me, at all times hereafter, and to those words of me pronounced, 
according to thine oth and promise : * else let the great cursse of 
Note what 
sore penal- 
ties the spi- 
rit is injoi- 
ned to suf- 
fer for dis- 
bedience. 
427. 
[* f which or 
that] 
* There is 
no mention 
made in the 
gospels that 
Christ was 
woorth a 
golden 
girdle. 
Bugs words. 
* Is it possi- 
ble to be 
greater

--- PAGE 458 ---
360 15. Booke. XJie di score n'e 
than s. A- ( lod, the anger of God, the shadowe and darknesse of everlasting 
del bens , ., , 
cursse? Condemnation be upon thee thou spirit of N. for ever and ever, 
ut'l^^a^'Xr '^''^^"se thou hast denied thine health, thy faith, and salvation, for 
pag. 263, 309. thy great disobedience thou are worthie to be con/demned. There- 
'^^ fore let the divine trinitie, angels, and archangels, thrones, domina- 
tions, principats, potestates, virtutes, cherubim and seraphim, and 
all the soules of the saints, that shall stand on the right hand of our 
4^^- Lord Jesus/ Christ, at the generall daie of judgement, condemne the 
spirit of A'', for ever and ever, and be a witnesse against thee, 
bicause of thy great disobedience, in and against thy promises, Fmi, 
fiat, Amen. 
Being thus bound, he must needs be obedient unto thee, whether 
he will or no : proove this. And here followeth a bond to call him 
to your A'^ and to shew you true visions at all times, as in the houre 
of F? to bind or inchant anie thing, and in the houre of %. for peace 
and concord, in the houre of $ to marre, to destroie, and to make 
sicke, in the houre of the 0 to bind toongs and other bonds of men, 
in the houre of 9 to increase love, joy, and good will, in the houre 
of 2 to put awaie enimitie or hatred, to know of theft, in the houre 
of the ]) for love, goodwill and concord, lead H tinne $ iron © 
gold 9 coppar 5 quicksilver ]) silver, &c. 
The xix. Chapter. 
* A popish 
supple- 
ment. 
This bond as followeth, is to call him into your christall stone, 
or glasse, &^c. 
LSO I doo conjure thee spirit N. by God the father, by 
God the Sonne, and by God the holie-ghost, A and O, 
the first and the last, and by the latter daie of judgement, 
of them which shall come to judge the quicke and the 
dead, and the world by fier, and by their vertues and powers I con- 
streine thee spirit JV. to come to him that holdeth the christall stone 
in his hand, & to appeare visiblie, as hereafter foloweth. Also I 
conjure thee spirit N. by these holie names of God >i> Tetragramma- 
ton ►{« Adonay ^ El Oicsion ^ Agla ►{< Jesus ^ of Nazareth 
and by the vertues thereof, and by his nativitie, death, buriall, resur- 
rection, and ascension, and by all other things apperteining unto his 
passion, and by the *blessed virgine Marie mother of our Lord Jesu 
Christ, and by all the joy which shee had when shea saw hir sonne 
rise from death to life, and by the vertues and powers therof I con-

--- PAGE 459 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap 19. 
361 
streine thee spirit A^. to come into the christall stone, & to appeare 
visiblie, as herafter shalbe declared. Also I conjure thee N. thou 
spirit, by all angels, archangels, thrones, dominations, principals, 
potestats, virtutes, cherubim and seraphim, and by the © D fj It (J 
9 5 1 and by the twelve signes, and by their vertues and powers,/ 
and by all things created and confirmed in the firmament, and by 
their vertues & powers I constreine thee spirit N. to appeare visiblie 
in that christall stone, in faire *forme and shape of a white angell, 
a greene angell, a blacke angell, a man, a woman, a boie, a maiden 
virgine, a white grehound, a divell with great homes, without anie 
hurt or danger of our bodies or soules, and trulie to informe and 
shew unto us, true visions of all things in that christall stone, accord- 
ing to thine oth and promise, and that without anie hinderance or/ 
tarrieng, to appeare visiblie, by this bond of words read over by mee 
three times, upon paine of everlasting condemnation ; Fiat, fiat. 
Amen. 
429. 
Belike he 
had the 
gift to ap- - 
peare in 
sundrie 
shapes, as 
it is said of 
Fi'Oteus in 
Ovid lib. 
metamor. 8. 
fab, 10: and 
of Vertum- 
nus; lib. me 
tamor. 14. 
fab. 16. 
TJmi being appeared, saie these words following. 
IConjuret thee spirit, by God the father, that thou shew true visions 
in that christall stone, where there be anie N. in such a place or 
no, upon paine of everlasting condemnation, Fiat, Amen. Also I 
conjure thee spirit A^^. by God the sonne Jesus Christ, that thou doo 
shew true visions unto us, whether it be gold or silver, or anie other 
metals, or whether there were anie or no, upon paine of condemna- 
tion, Fiat, Amen. Also I conjure thee spirit N. by God the Holie- 
ghost, the which dooth sanctifie all faithfull soules and spirits, and 
by their vertues and powers I constreine thee spirit N. to speake, 
open, and to declare, the true waie, how we may come by these 
treasures hidden in N. and how to have it in our custodie, & who are 
the keepers thereof, and how manie there be, and what be their 
names, and by whom it was laid there, and to shew me true visions 
of what sort and similitude they be, and how long they have kept it, 
and to knowe in what daies and houres we shall call such a spirit, 
A'', to bring unto us these treasures, into such a place A^. upon paine 
of everlasting condemnation ►{<[.] Also I constreine thee spirit A'', by 
all angels, archangels, thrones, dominations, principats, potestats, 
virtutes, cherubim & seraphim, that you doo shew a true vision in 
this christall stone, who did conveie or steale away such a A'', and 
where it is, & who hath it, and how farre off, and what is his or hir 
name, and how and when to come unto it, upon paine of eternall 
condemnation, Fiat, Amen. Also I conjure thee spirit A^. by the 
© D b 'it ,J ? § and by all the characters in the firmament, that 
3 A 
[t This par. 
small type.] 
Note that 
the spirit is 
tied to o- 
bediece un- 
der paine 
of condem- 
nation and 
hell fier,

--- PAGE 460 ---
362 15. Booke. The discovei'ie 
thou doo shew unto me a true vision in this christall stone, where 
such TV. and in what state he is, and how long he hath beene there, 
and what time he will be in such a place, what daie and houre : and 
this and all other things to declare plainelie, in paine of hell fier ; 
Fiat, Amen. 
A licence to depart. 
[• This in still THvEpart* out of the sight of this christall stone in peace for a time, 
smaller.] readie to appeare therein againe at anie time or times I 
shall call thee, by the vertue of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by the 
bonds of words which are written in this booke, and to appeere 
visiblie, as the words be rehersed. I constreine thee spirit N. by 
the divinitie of the Godhead, to be obedient unto these words 
rehearsed, upon paine of everlasting condemnation, both in this world, 
and in the world to come ; Fiat, fiat, fiat, Amen.// 
430- 311. 
The XX. Chapter. 
This is con- 
demned for 
rar.ke follie 
by the do- 
ctors : as by 
Chrysos sup. 
Matth. Gn- 
gor. in homil. 
sup. Epiphan. 
Domini ; and 
others. 
[t This par. in 
the second-sized 
type.] 
When to taike with spirits, and to have true answers to find out 
a theefe. 
I HE dales and houres of ^ ^ ^ ^rid the 5 is best to doo 
all crafts of necromancie, & for to speake with spirits, 
and for to find theft, and to have true answer thereof, or 
of anie other such like. ^ And in the dales and houres 
of © If 9 is best to doo all experiments of love, and to purchase 
grace, and for to be invisible, and to doo anie operation, whatsoever 
it be, for anie thing, the ]) being in a convenient signe. \ As when 
thou laborest for theft, see the moone be in an earthie signe, as y 
m yf, or of the aier, as n ^ H And if it be for love, favor 
or grace, let the D be in a signe of the fier, as ty vii ti ^"^^ fo^' 
hatred, in a signe of the water, as © Viy'H- For anie other experi- 
ment, let the ]) be in <r. H And if thou findest the © & the D 
in one signe that is called in even number, then thou maiest write, 
consecrate, conjure, and make readie all maner of things that thou 
wilt doo, &c. 
c 
To speake with spirits. 
Allt these names, Oriinoth, Belimoth, Lymocke, and say thus : I 
conjure you up by the names of the angels Saiur and Azimor,

--- PAGE 461 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. .-i. 363 
that you intend to me in this houre, and send unto me a spirit called 
Sagrigrit, that hee doo fulfill my commandement and desire, and 
that also can understand my words for one or two yeares, or as long 
as I will, &c. 
The xxi. Chapter. 
A confutation of conjuration, especiallie of the raising, binding 
and dismissing of the divell, of going invisible, and other lewd 
practises. 
HUS farre have we waded in shewing at large the vanitie 
of necromancers, conjurors, and such as pretend to have 
reall conference and consultation with spirits and divels : 
wherein (I trust) you see what notorious blasphemie is 
committed, besides other blind superstitious ceremonies, a disordered 
heap, which are so far from building up the endevors of these blacke 
art practitioners, that they doo altogether ruinate & overthrow 
them, making them in their follies and falshoods as bare and naked 
as an anatomic. As for these ridiculous conjurations, last rehearsed, 
being of no small reputation among the ignorant, they are for the 
most part made by T. R. (for so much of his name he bewraieth) 
and fohnj Cokars, invented and devised for the augmentation and 
maintenance of their living, for the edifieng of the poore, and for the 
propagating and inlarging of Gods glorie, as in the beginning of 
their booke of conjurations they protest ; which in this place, for 
the further manifestation of their impietie, and of the witchmongers 
follie and credulitie, I thought good to insert, whereby the/ residue of 
their proceedings may be judged, or rather detected. For if we 
seriouslie behold the matter of conjuration, and the drift of conjurors, 
we shall find them, in mine opinion, more faultie than such as take 
upon them to be witches, as manifest offenders against the majestie 
of God, and his holie lawe, and as apparent violators of the lawes 
and quietnesse of this realme : although indeed they bring no such 
thing to passe, as is surmised and urged by credulous persons, 
couseners, liers, and witchmongers. For these are alwaies learned, 
and rather abusers of others, than they themselves by others abused. 
But let us see what appearance of truth or possibilitie is wrapped 
within these mysteries, and let us unfold the deceipt. They have 
made choice of certeine words, whereby they sale they can worke 
miracles, &c. And first of all, that they call divels & soules out of 
All the for- 
mer practi- 
ses breeflie 
confuted. 
43t- 
See the ti- 
tle of the 
booke, with 
the authors 
intent, in a 
marginall 
note, pag. 
393- 
[of this book.] 
312

--- PAGE 462 ---
364 
13. Bookc. 
The discoverie 
Luk. 16. &c. 
An ironi- 
cal! con- 
futation. 
hell (though we find in the scriptures manifest proofes that all pas- 
sages are stopped concerning the egresse out of hell) so as they may 
go thither, but they shall never get out, for Ab inferno nulla est 
redemptio, out of hell there is no redemption. Well, when they have 
gotten them up, they shut them in a circle made with chalke, which 
is so stronglie beset and invironed with crosses and names, that they 
cannot for their lives get out ; which is a verie probable matter. 
Then can they bind them, and lose them at their pleasures, and 
make them that have beene Hers from the beginning, to tell the truth : 
yea, they can compell them to doo anie thing. And the divels are 
forced to be obedient unto them, and yet cannot be brought to due 
obedience unto God their creator. This done (I saie) they can worke 
all maner of miracles (saving blew miracles) and this is beleeved of 
manie to be true : 
Englished by 
Abraham 
Fltming. 
Tarn credula mens hoininis, arrectce fabulis aures, 
So light of beleefe is the mind of man. 
And attentive to tales his eares now and than. 
1. Pet. 2. 
Ephes. 5. 
Ps. 72, & 78. 
Sap. 16. 
Ecclus. 43. 
To denie 
the subsi- 
stence or 
natural! 
being of a 
thing ma- 
terial! and 
visible is 
impudecie. 
But if Christ (onelie for a time) left the power of working mi/racles 
among his apostles and disciples for the confirmation of his gospell, 
and the faith of his elect : yet I denie altogether, that he left that 
power with these knaves, which hide their cousening purposes under 
those lewd and foolish words, according to that which Peter saith ; 
With feined words they make merchandize of you. And therfore 
the counsell is good that Paiile giveth us, when he biddeth us take 
heed that no man deceive us with vaine words. For it is the Lord 
only that worketh great woonders, and bringeth mightie things to 
passe. It is also written, that Gods word, and not the words of 
conjurors, or the charmes of witches, healeth all things, maketh 
tempests, and stilleth them. 
But put case the divell could be fetched up and fettered, and loosed 
againe at their pleasure, &c : I marvell yet, that anie can be so 
bewitched, as to be made to beleeve, that by vertue of their words, 
anie earthhe creature can be made invisible. We thinke it a lie, to 
saie that white is blacke, and blacke white : but it is a more shame- 
lesse assertion to affirme, that white is not, or blacke is not at all ; 
313. and yet more impudencie to hold that/ a man is a horsse ; but most 
apparent impudencie to saie, that a man is no man, or to be extenu- 
ated into such a quantitie, as therby he may be invisible, and yet 
remaine in life and health, &c : and that in the cleare light of the 
dale, even in the presence of them that are not blind. But surelie.

--- PAGE 463 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. it. 365 
he that cannot make one haire white or blacke, whereof (on the 
other side) not one falleth from the head without Gods speciall 
providence, can never bring to passe, that the visible creature of 
God shall become nothing, or lose the vertue and grace powred ther- 
into by God the creator of all things. 
If they sale that the divell covereth them with a cloud or veile, as f^^."^-^-^ ^' 
M. Mai. Bodin, & manie other doo affirme ; yet (me thinkes) we and 30'. 
should either see the cover, or the thing covered. And though per- 
chance they sale in their harts ; Tush, the Lord seeth not, who 
indeed hath blinded them, so as seeing, they see not : yet they shall 
never be able to persuade the wise, but that both God and man dooth 
see both them and their knaverie in this behalfe. I have heard of a „ , , , 
*JonnJau- 
foole, who was made beleeve that he should go invisible, and naked ; regui ser- 
while he was well whipped by them, who (as he thought) could not Gasper A- 
see him. Into which fooles paradise they saie* he was brought, that "astro both 
_ _ I 07 Spaniards. 
enterprised to kill the pnnce of Orenge./ Ann. Dom. 
1582. March 
18. after dinner upon a sundaie this mischeefe was doone. Read the whole discourse hereof printed at 
London for Tho : Chard and Will : Brome bookesellers. 
The xxii. Chapter. 
433- 
A comparison betweene popish exorcists and other coitjtirors, a 
popish conjuration published by a great doctor of the Romish 
churchy his rules and cautions. 
SEE no difference betweene these and popish conjurations ; 
for they agree in order, words, and matter, dififering in no 
circumstance, but that the papists doo it without shame 
openlie, the other doo it in hugger mugger secretlie. The 
papists (I saie) have officers in this behalfe, which are called exorcists 
or conjurors, and they looke narrowlie to other cousenors, as having 
gotten the upper hand over them. And bicause the papists shall be 
without excuse in this behalfe, and that the world may see their 
cousenage, impietie, and follie to be as great as the others, I will cite 
one conjuration (of which sort I might cite a hundred) published by 
Jacobus de Chusa, a great doctor of the Romish church, which serveth 
to find out the cause of noise and spirituall rumbling in houses, 
churches, or chappels, and to conjure walking spirits: which evermore l""^,"^^'^" 
is knaverie and cousenage in the highest degree. Marke the cousen- 
ing devise hereof, and conferre the impietie with the others. Observati- 
First (forsooth) he saith it is expedient to fast three daies, and to ons for the 
11 • 1 r 1 1 exorcising 
celebrate a certeme number of masses, and to repeate the seven preest. 
7a<f, dc Chusae 
in lib. de af- 
paritionib.

--- PAGE 464 ---
rs- Booke. 
The discoverie 
314 
434- 
Memoran- 
dum that 
he must be 
the veriest 
knave or 
foole in all 
the com- 
panie. 
These spi- 
rits are not 
so cunning 
by daie as 
by night. 
*For so they 
might be 
bewraied. 
For so the 
cousenage 
may be best 
handled. 
psalmes penitentiall : then foure or five preests must be called to the 
place where the haunt or noise is, then a candle hallowed on candle- 
mas daie must be lighted, and in the light/ing thereof also must the 
seven psalmes be said, and the gospel! of S. John. Then there must 
be a crosse and a censer with frankincense, and therewithall the 
place must be censed or perfumed, holie water must be sprinkled, and 
a holie stoale must be used, and (after diverse other ceremonies) a 
praier to God must be made, in maner and forme following : 
O Lord Jesus Christ, the knower of all secrets, which alwaies/ 
revealest all hoalsome and profitable things to thy faithfull children, 
and which sufferest a spirit to shew himselfe in this place, we beseech 
thee for thy bitter passion, &c : vouchsafe to command this spirit, to 
reveale and signifie unto us thy servants, without our terror or hurt, 
what he is, to thine honour, and to his comfort ; In nomine fiatris, 
Sr'c. And then proceed in these words : We beseech thee, for Christs 
sake, O thou spirit, that if there be anie of us, or among us, whom 
thou wouldest answer, name him, or else manifest him by some 
signe. Is it frier P. or doctor D. or doctor Burc. or sir Feats, or sir 
John, or sir Robert : Et sic de cateris circunstantibus. For it is well 
tried (saith the glosse) he will not answer everie one. If the spirit 
make anie sound of voice, or knocking, at the naming of anie one, he 
is the cousener (the conjuror I would sale) that must have the charge 
of this conjuration or examination. And these forsooth must be the 
interrogatories, to wit : Whose soule art thou 
Wherefore camest 
thou 
What wouldest thou have ? Wantest thou any suffrages, 
masses, or almes How manie masses will serve thy turne, three, 
six, ten, twentie, thirtie, &c.'' By what preest ? Must he be religious 
or secular? Wilt thou have anie fasts? What ? How manie? How 
great ? And by what persons ? Among hospitalles ? Lepres ? Or 
beggars ? What shall be the signe of thy perfect deliverance ? 
Wherefore liest thou in purgatorie ? And such like. This must be 
doone in the night. 
If there appeare no signe at this houre, it must be deferred until] 
another houre. Holie water must be left in the place. There is no 
feare (they sale) that such a spirit will hurt the conjuror : for he can 
sinne no more, as being in the meane state betweene good and evill, 
and as yet in the state of satisfaction. *If the spirit doo hurt, then it is 
a damned soule, and not an elect. Everie man may not be present 
hereat, speciallie such as be weake of complexion. They appeare 
in diverse maners, not alwaies in bodie, or bodilie shape (as it is read 
in the life of S. Martine, that the divell did) but sometimes invisible, 
as onelie by sound, voice, or noise. Thus farre Jacobus de Chusa. 
But bicause you shall see that these be not emptie words, nor

--- PAGE 465 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 23 
slanders; but that in truth such things are commonlie put in practise 
in the Romish church, I will here set downe an instance,/ latelie 435. 
and truelie, though lewdlie performed : and the same in effect as 
followeth./ 
The xxiii. Chapter. 
316. 
A late experiment, or cousening conjuration practised at Orleance 
by the Franciscane Friers, how it was detected, and the judgement 
against the authors of that comedie. 
N the yeare of our Lord 1534. at Orleance in France, the 
Maiors wife died, willing and desiring to be buried with- 
out anie pompe or noise, &c. Hir husband, who rever- 
enced the memoriall of hir, did even as she had willed 
him. And bicause she was buried in the church of the *Franciscans, 
besides her father and grandfather, and gave them in reward onelie 
six crownes, whereas they hoped for a greater preie ; shortlie after it 
chanced, that as he felled certeine woods and sold them, they desired 
him to give them some part thereof freelie without monie : which he 
flatlie denied. This they tooke verie greevouslie. And whereas be- 
fore they misliked him, now they conceived such displeasure as they 
devised this meanes to be revenged; to wit, that his wife was damned 
for ever. The cheefe workemen and framers of this tragedie were 
Colimannus, and Stephaiitts Aterbatensis, both doctors of divinitie ; 
this Coliman. was a great conjuror, & had all his implements in a 
readines, which he was woont to use in such busines. And thus they 
handled the matter. They place over the arches of the church, a 
yoong novice ; who about midnight, when they came to mumble their 
praiers, as they were woont to do, maketh a great rumbling, and noise. 
Out of hand the nioonks beganne to conjure and to charme, but he 
answered nothing. Then being required to give a signe, whether he 
were a dumme spirit or no, he beganne to rumble againe : which 
thing they tooke as a certeine signe. Having laid this foundationi 
they go unto certeine citizens, cheefe men, and such as favoured 
them, decla/ring that a heavie chance had happened at home in their 
monasterie ; not shewing what the matter was, but desiring them to 
come to their mattens at midnight. When these citizens were come, 
and that praiers were begunne, the counterfet spirit beginneth to 
make a marvellous noise in the top of the church. And being asked 
what he meant, and who he was, gave signes that it was not lawfull 
A couse- 
ning con- 
juration. 
» Of this or- 
der read 
noble stuffe 
in a booke 
printed at 
Frankeford 
under the 
title of Al- 
coran. Fran- 
ciscanorum . 
Note how 
the Fran- 
ciscans can- 
not conjure 
without a 
confede- 
rate. 
O notorius 
impuden- 
cie ! with 
such shame- 
lesse faces 
10 abuse so

--- PAGE 466 ---
;68 
15. Booke- 
The discoverie 
worship- 
full a com- 
panie. 
"The con- 
federate 
spirit was 
taught that 
lesson be- 
fore. 
For so 
might the 
confede- 
rate be 
found. 
for him to speake. Therefore they commanded him to make answer 
by tokens and signes to certeine things they would demand of him. 
Now was there a hole made in the vawt, through the which he might 
heare and understand the voice of the conjuror. And then had he in 
his hand a litle boord, which at everie question, he strake, in such 
sort as he might easilie be heard beneath. First they asked him, 
whether he were one of them that had beene buried in the same 
place. Afterwards they reckoning manie by name, which had beene 
buried there ; at the last also they name the Maiors wife : and there 
by and by the spirit gave a signe that he was hir soule. He was 
further asked, whether he were damned or no ; and if he were, for 
what cause, for what desert, or fault ; whether for covetousnes, or 
wanton lust, for pride or want of charitie ; or whether it were for 
316. heresie, or for the sect of Lutherl newlie sproong up : also what he 
meant by that noise and stirre he kept there ; whether it were to have 
the bodie now buried in holie ground to be digged up againe, and 
laid in some other place. To all which points he answered by signes, 
as he was commanded, by the which he affirmed or denied anie thing, 
according as he strake the boord twise or thrise together. And when 
he had thus given them to understand, that* the verie cause of his 
damnation was Luthers heresie, and that the bodie must needs be 
digged up againe : the moonks requested the citizens, whose presence 
they had used or rather abused, that they would beare witnesse of 
those things which they had seene with their eies ; and that they 
would subscribe to such things as were doone a few days before. The 
citizens taking good advise on the matter, least they should offend the 
Maior, or bring themselves in trouble, refused so to doo. But the 
moonks notwithstanding take from thence the sweete bread, which 
they called the host and bodie of our Lord, with all the relikes of 
saintes, and carrie them to another place, and there saie their masse. 
4^y. The bishops substi/tute judge (whome they called Officiall) under- 
standing that matt