rought this syo. 
mischiefe, & take it away by thy great justice, Eson elioji emaris, 
ales, age ; and strike the carpet with your wand. 
^ A notable charme or medicine to pull out an arrowhead, or 
anie such thing that sticketh iji the flesh or bones, and can- 
not otherwise be had out. 
Q Aie three severall times kneeling ; Oremus, prceceptis salutaribus 
^ moniti. Pater noster, ave Maria. Then make a crosse saieng : 
The Hebrew knight strake our Lord Jesu Christ, and I beseech thee. The He-

--- PAGE 318 ---
2 20 Booke. The discove7'ie 
O Lord Jesu Christ ^ by the same iron, speare, bloud and water, 
to pull out this iron : In 7iomine patris ►{< filii ►{< spiritus 
sancti ►J* 
^ Charmes against a qtiotidian ague. 
Cut an apple in three peeces, and write upon the one ; The father 
is uncreated : upon the other ; The father is incomprehensible: 
upon the third ; The father is eternall. Otherwise : Write upon 
a massecake cut in three peeces ; O ague to be worshipped : on the 
second ; O sicknesse to be ascribed to health and joies : on the third ; 
Pax ►J* max ^ fax ►{< and let it be eaten fasting. Otherwise : 
Paint upon three like peeces of a massecake. Pater pax >^ Adonai 
^ films vita ^ sabbaoth ►J* spiritics sanctus ^ Tetragrammaton ►{» 
and eate it, as is afore said./ 
^ For all niafier of agues intermittant. 
JOine two little stickes togither in the middest, being of one 
length, and hang it about your necke in the forme of a crosse. 
-:1s- Otherwise : For this disease the Turkes put within their doublet 
a ball of wood, with an other peece of wood, and strike the same, 
speaking certeine frivolous words, -lil- Otherwise : Certeine monks 
hanged scrolles about the necks of such as were sicke, willing them 
to sale certeine praiers at each fit, and at the third fit to hope well : 
and made them beleeve that they should thereby receive cure. 
Periapts, characters, S^c : for agues, and to cure all diseases, 
and to deliver from all evill. 
THe first chapter of S- fohns gospell in small letters consecrated 
at a masse, and hanged about ones necke, is an in/comparable 
amulet or tablet, which delivereth from all witchcrafts and divelish 
practises. But me thinkes, if one should hang a whole testament, or 
rather a bible, he might beguile the divell terriblie. For indeed so 
would S. Barnard have done, whom the divell told, that he could 
shew him seven verses in the psalter, which being dailie repeated, 
would of themselves bring anie man to heaven, and preserve him 
from hell. But when S. Barnard desired the divell to tell him which 
they were, he refused, saieng, he might then thinke him a foole so to 
prejudice himselfe. Well (quoth S. Barnard) I will doo well enough 
for that, for I will dailie sale over the whole psalter. The divell 
hearing him saie so, told him which were the verses, least in reading 
brue knighi 
was cano- 
nized a 
saint to wit, 
S. Loneinus, 
195. 
A crossed 
appension, 
with other 
appensions. 
For bodie 
and soule. 
271. 
S. Barnard 
overmat- 
cheth the 
divell for 
all his sub- 
tiltie.

--- PAGE 319 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. is. 221 
over the whole psalter dailie, he should merit too much for others. 
But if the hanging of S. Johns gospell about the necke be so bene- 
ficiall ; how if one should eate up the same ? 
^ More ckarines for agttes. 
TAke the partie by the hand, and saie ; Aequi facilis sit tibi haec 
febris, atque Maries virgini Christi partus. 4^ Otherwise : 
Wash with the partie, and privilie saie this psalme, Exaltabo te Dens 
vietes, rex, di-'c. -sis- Otherwise : Weare about your necke, a peece of 
a naile taken from a crosse, and wrapped in wooll. Otherwise : 
Drinke wine, wherein a sworde hath beene drowned that hath cut off 
ones head, ■i'^ Otherwise : Take three consecrated massecakes, and 
write upon the first : Qualis est pater- talis est vita : on the second ; 
Qualis est filius, talis est sanctus : on the third ; Qualis est spiritus 
tale est remediiim. Then give them to the sicke man, enjoining him 
to eate none other thing that daie wherein he eateth anie of them, 
nor yet drinke : and let him saie fifteene Pater nosters, and as manie 
Aves, in the honour and praise of the Trinitie. 4lr Otherwise : Lead 
the sicke man on a fridaie before sunne rising towards the east, and 
let him hold up his hands towards the sunne, and saie : This is the 
daie, wherein the Lord God came to the crosse. But as the crosse 
shall never more come to him : so let never the hot or cold fit of this 
ague come anie more unto this man. In nomine patris ►{< fi'^lii, 
spiritus ►i* sancti Then saie seven and twentie Pater nosters, 
and as manie Anes, and use this three dales togither. -sjs- Otherwise:/ 
Pretious 
restorities.* 
[*? restorati[vles] 
Fecana, cageti, daphnes, gebdre, geddco, 
Ge'bali slant, sednon slant pheb as, hecas,* &^ hedas. 
2y2. 
This is too 
mysticall 
Everie one of these words must be written upon a peece of bread, gHshed" 
and/ be given in order one daie after another to the sicke bodie, and "5"°* 1^^- 
so must he be cured. This saith Nicholas Hemingius he chanced to \ec^ai\^^'^ 
read in the schooles in jest ; so as one noting the words, practised 
the medicine in earnest ; and was not onelie cured himselfe, but also 
cured manie others thereby. And therefore he concludeth, that this 
is a kind of a miraculous cure, wrought by the illusion of the divell : 
whereas in truth, it will fall out most commonlie, that a tertian ague 
will not hold anie man longer than so, though no medicine be given, Ferneiius. 
nor anie words spoken, Otherwise : This word, Abra cadabra 
written on a paper, with a certeine figure joined therewith, and hanged 
about ones necke, helpeth the ague. •>!:- Otherwise : Let the urine of 
the sicke bodie made earlie in the morning, be softlie heated nine 
dales togither continuallie, untill all be consumed into vapor.

--- PAGE 320 ---
222 .J Booke. The discover ie 
■s)- Otherwise : A crosse made of two litle twigs joined togither, 
wherewith when the partie is touched, he will be whole ; speciallie if 
he weare it about his necke. ^ Otherwise : Take a like quantitie of 
water out of three ponds of equall bignesse, and tast thereof in a new 
earthen vessell, and drinke of it when the fit commeth. 
Notable In the yeare of our lord 1568. the Spaniards and Italians received 
the Spa-^ from the pope, this incantation following ; whereby they were pro- 
Itafians^ mised both remission of sinnes, and good successe in their warres 
in the lowe countries. Which whether it be not as prophane and 
impious, as anie witches charme, I report me to the indifferent 
reader. 4* Crucem pro nobis subiit ^ stans i)i ilia sitiit ^ Jesus 
sacratis iiianibtts, clavis ferreis, pedibtis perfossis, Jestis, Jesus, 
Jesiis : Domine libera nos ab hoc malo, ab hac paste : then three 
Pater nosters, and three ave Maries. Also the same yeere their 
ensignes were by the authoritie aforesaid conjured with certeine 
ceremonies, & consecrated against their enimies. And if you read 
the histories of these warres, you male see what victorie they gained 
hereby. Item, they baptised their cheefe standard, and gave it to 
name S. Margaret, who overthrew the divell. And bicause you 
sjj. shall under/stand the mysterie hereof, I have the rather set it downe 
elsewhere, being indeed worth the reading. 
^ For a bloiidie Jlux, or rather an issue oj bloud. 
He must 
answer by 
none o- 
ther, for 
she per- 
haps hath 
the curing 
thereof by 
patent. 
197. 
TAke a cup of cold water, and let fall thereinto three drops 
of the same bloud, and betweene each drop saie a Pater 
noster, and an Ave, then drinke to the patient, and saie ; Who 
shall helpe you ? The patient must answer S. Marie. Then saie 
you ; i". Marie stop the issue of bloud. Otherwise : Write upon 
the patients forhead with the same bloud ; Consummatum est. 
4'ir Otherwise : Saie to the patient ; Sanguis mane in te, sicut Jecit 
Christus in se; Sanguis mane in tua vena, sicut Chris tus in sua poena j 
Sanguis mane Jixus, sicut Christus quando Juit crucijixus : ter, 
•^6- Otherwise, as followeth. 
hi the bloud of Adam death was taken 
In the bloud of Christ it was all to shaken 
A7id by the same bloud I doo thee charge, 
That thou doo rtmne no longer at large. jfy Otherwise. 
Christ was borne at Bethelem, and suffered at Jerusalem, where 
his bloud was troubled. I command thee by the vertue of God, 
and through/ the helpe of all saincts, to staie even as Jordan did.

--- PAGE 321 ---
of Witchcraft. cha,,. is. 223 
when John baptised Christ Jesus ; In nomine patris ►J* filii ^ &^ 
spirihis [sanc/i ►i* •«> Otherwise : Put thy nameles finger in the 
wound, and make therwith three crosses upon the wound, and saie 
five Pater nosters, five Aves, and one Credo, in the honour of the five 
wounds. 4it Otherwise : Touch that part and saie, De latere ejus See J. wier. 
exivit sanguis &^ aqua. Otherwise : In tiomiite patris filii Hb" '""^ 
£r» spiritus sancti ►{< &"c. Chijnrat, chara, sarite, co7ifirma, consona, 
Imohalite. Otherwise : Sepa ►J* sepaga Ht* sepagoga ^ sta sanguis 
in nomine patris podendi filii ►f" podera ►f" spiritus sancti 
^ pandorica *^pax tecum, Amen. 
^ Cures commensed and finished by witchcraft. 
THere was a jolHe fellowe that tooke upon him to be a notable 
surgion, in the dutchie of Mefitz, 1567. to whom there resorted 
a Gentleman that had beene vexed with sicknesse, named/ Elibert, 274. 
having a kerchiefe on his head, according to the guise of sicke folke. 
But the surgion made him pull off his kerchiefe, and willed him to 
drinke with him freelie. The sickeman said he durst not ; for he was 
forbidden by physicke so to doo. Tush (said this cunning man) they 
know not your disease : be ruled by me, and take in your drinke 
lustilie. For he thought that when he was well tippled, he might the 
more easilie beguile him in his bargaine, and make his reward the 
greater, which he was to receive in part aforehand. When they had 
well droonke, he called the sicke man aside, and told him the great- 
nes and danger of his disease, and how that it grew by meanes of 
witchcraft, and that it would be universallie spread in his house, and 
among all his cattell, if it were not prevented : and impudentlie per- 
suaded the sicke man to receive cure of him. And after bargaine The surgi- 
made, he demanded of the sicke man, whether he had not anie at mosHmpu- 
home, whom he might assuredlie trust. The sicke man answered, dentiie set- 
that he had a daughter and a servant. The cousener asked how old knaverie 
his daughter was ? The patient said, twentie. Well (said the 
cousener) that is fit for our turne. Then he made the mother and father 
to kneele on their knees to their daughter, and to desire hir in all 
things to obey the physician, and that she would doo in everie thing 
as he commanded hir ; otherwise hir father could not be restored to 
his health. In which respect hir parents humblie besought hir on 
their knees so to doo. Then he assigned hir to bring him into his 
lodging hir fathers haire, and hir mothers, and of all those which he 
kept in his house, as well of men and women, as also of his cattell. 
When she came therewith unto him, according to the match made, 
and hir parents commandement, he lead hir downe into a lowe parlor.

--- PAGE 322 ---
2 24 
The discoverie 
A preten- 
ded conju- 
ration. 
275- 
Ad vada 
tot vadit 
urna quod 
ipsa cadit. 
where having made a long speech, he opened a booke that laie on the 
boord, and laieth thereon two knives acrosse, with much circumstance 
of words. Then conjureth he, and maketh strange characters, and at 
length he maketh a circle on the ground, wherein he causeth hir to 
sticke one of those conjured knives ; and after manie more strange 
words, he maketh hir sticke the other knife beside it. Then fell downe 
the maid in a swoone for feare ; so as he was faine to frote hir and put 
a sop into hir mouth, after the receipt whereof she was sore troubled 
and amazed. Then he made hir brests to be uncovered, so as when/ 
198. they were bare, he dal/lied with them, diverslie and long together. 
Then he made hir lie right upward, all uncovered and bare belowe 
hir pappes. Wherein the maid being loth to obeie him, resisted, and 
in shame forbad that villanie. Then said the knave ; Your fathers 
destruction is at hand : for except you will be ruled, he and all his 
familie shall susteine greater greefe and inconvenience, than is yet 
happened unto him. And no remedie, except you will seeke his 
utter overthrowe, I must have carnall copulation with you, and there- 
withall fell into hir bosome, and overthrew hir and hir virginitie. So 
did he the second daie, and attempted the like on the third daie. 
But he failed then of his purpose, as the wench confessed after- 
wards. In the meane time he ministred so cruell medicines to the 
sicke man, that through the torments therof he feared present death, 
and was faine to keepe his bed, whereas he walked about before 
verie well and lustilie. The patient in his torments calleth unto 
him for remedie, who being slacke and negligent in that behalfe, 
made roome for the daughter to accompanie hir father, who asked 
hir what she thought of the cure, and what hope she had of his 
recoverie. Who with teares remained silent, as being oppressed 
with greefe ; till at the last in abundance of sorrowe she uttered the 
whole matter to hir father. This dooth Johannes Wierus report, 
saieng, that it came unto him by the lamentable relation of the 
father himselfe. And this is here at this time for none other purpose 
rehearsed, but that men may hereby learne to take heed of such 
cousening merchants, and knowe what they be that take upon them 
to be so cunning in witchcraft ; least they be bewitched : as maister 
Elibert and his daughter were. 
Three 
morsels 
^ Another witcJicraft or knaverte, practised by the same surgion. 
the first ''"T'His surgion ministred to a noble man, that laie sicke of an 
with'chHsts 'igue, offering unto him three peeces of a roote to be eaten at 
birth, the three morsels : saieng to the first : I would Christ had not beene

--- PAGE 323 ---
of Witchcraft. Chap, 1 8. 2 2^ 
borne ; unto the second : I would he had not suffered ; unto the second 
third : I would he had not risen againe. And then putting them passion^ the 
about the sicke mans necke, said ; Be of good cheere. And if he I?'"^'^ 
' ' ° nis resur- 
lost them, whosoever tooke them up, should therewithal! take awaie/ rection. 
his ague. ^ Otherwise : Jesus Christ, which was borne, deliver thee s'jd, 
from this infirmitie Jesus Christ which died ^deliver thee from this 
infirmitie ^ Jesus Christ which rose againe ►f" deliver thee from this 
infirmitie. Then dailie must be said five Pater nosters, and five 
Aves. 
^ Another experiment for one bewitched. 
ANother such cousening physician persuaded one which had a A couse- 
timpanie, that it was one old viper, and twoo yoong mainteined TidL^ and 
in his bellie by witchcraft. But being watched, so as he could not ^ f?o'ish 
•' r patient. 
conveie vipers into his ordure or excrements, after his purgations : 
at length he told the partie, that he should suffer the paines of child- 
birth, if it were not prevented ; and therefore he must put his hand 
into his breech, and rake out those wormes there. But the mother 
of the sicke partie having warning hereof, said she could doo that hir 
selfe. So the cousener was prevented, and the partie died onelie of 
a timpanie, and the knave ran awaie out of the countrie. 
^ Otherwise. 
^^Onsieiir Bodin telleth of a witch, who undertaking to cure John. Bodin. 
a woman bewitched, caused a masse to be soong at mid- 
night in our ladies chap/pell. And when she had overlien the 199. 
sicke partie, and breathed certeine words upon hir, she was healed. 
Wherein Bodi7i saith, she followed the example of Elias the prophet, Kakozelia. 
who raised the Stcnamitie. And this storie must needs be true : for 
goodman Hardivin Blesensis his host at the signe of the lion told 
him the storie. 
^ A knacke to knowe whether you be bewitched., or no, Sr'c. 
IT is also expedient to learne how to know whether a sicke man A/ai. male/. 
be bewitched or no : this is the practise thereof. You must ^Barth."'spin.' 
hold molten lead over the sicke bodie, and powre it into a porrenger 
r „ ^ , , -r T , Mal.maUf. 
full of water ; and then, if there appeare upon the 
lead, anie image, you may then 
knowe the partie is 
bewitched./ 
G G

--- PAGE 324 ---
226 
12. Booke. 
The discoverie 
277. 
The xix. Chapter. 
Scotus in 4. 
distinct. 34. 
de imperio. 
Dist. 4. 
Go/red. in 
summa sua. 
craft 
Tkai one witchcraft Jiiaie lawfiillie meete with another. 
jjCOTUS, Hostiensis, Gofridits, and all the old canonists 
agree, that it is lavvfull to take awaie witchcraft by witch- 
craft, Et vana vanis contimdere. And Scotiis saith. It 
were follie to forbeare to encounter witchcraft by witch- 
(saith he) there can be none inconvenience therein ; 
bicause the overthrower of witchcraft assenteth not to the works 
of the divell. And therefore he saith further, that it is meritorious 
so to extinguish and overthrow the divels workes. As though he 
should sale ; It maketh no matter, though S. Paule sale ; Non fades 
7nalu7n, ut inde veniat bomijn.. Thou shalt not doo evill, that good 
male come thereof. Htimbertiis saith, that witchcraft male be taken 
awaie by that meanes whereby it was brought. But Gofrediis in- 
veieth sore against the oppugners thereof. Pope Nicholas the fift 
gave indulgence and leave to bishop Miraties (who was so bewitched 
in his privities, that he could not use the gift of venerie) to seeke 
remedie at witches hands. And this was the clause of his dispensa- 
tion, Ut ex duobus malis fugiatur majus, that of two evils, the greater 
should be avoided. And so a witch, by taking his doublet, cured 
him, and killed the other witch : as the storie saith, which is to be 
scene in M. Mai. and diverse other writers. 
The XX. Chapter. 
Mai. male/, 
par. 2. qua. 1. 
cap. I. 278. 
* Whereof 
looke more 
in a little 
booke set 
foorth in 
print. 
Who are privileged from witches, what bodies are aptest to be 
bewitched, or to be witches, why wometi are rather witches than 
men, and what they are. 
low if you will know who and what persons are privileged 
from witches, you must understand, that they be even 
such as cannot be bewitched. In the number of whome 
first be the in/quisitors, and such as exercise publike 
justice upon them. Howbeit,* a justice in Essex, whome for diverse 
respects I have left unnamed, not long since thought he was be- 
witched, in the verie instant whiles he examined the witch ; so as 
his leg was broken therby, &c : which either was false, or else this 
rule untrue, or both rather injurious unto Gods providence. Second-

--- PAGE 325 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 20. 
lie, such as observe dulie the rites and ceremonies of holie church, 
and worship them with reverence, through the sprinkling of holie 
water, and receiving consecrated salt, by the lawfull use of candles 
hallowed on Candelmas daie, and greene leaves consecrated on 
Palme sundaie (which things they sale the/ church useth for the 
qualifieng of the divels power) are preserved from witchcraft. 
Thirdlie, some are preserved by their good angels, which attend and 
wait upon them. 
But I male not omit here the reasons, which they bring, to prove 
what bodies are the more apt and effectuall to execute the art of 
fascination. And that is, first they saie the force of celestiall bodies, 
which indifferentlie communicate their vertues unto men, beasts, 
trees, stones, &c. But this gift and naturall influence of fascination 
maie be increased in man, according to his affections and perturba- 
tions ; as thorough anger, feare, love, hate^ &c. For by hate (saith 
Vairus) entereth a fierie inflammation into the eie of man, which 
being violentlie sent out by beams and streames, &c : infect and be- 
witch those bodies against whome they are opposed. And therefore 
he saith (in the favour of women) that that is the cause why women 
are oftener found to be witches than men. For (saith he) they 
have such an unbrideled force of furie and concupiscence naturallie, 
that by no meanes it is possible for them to temper or moderate the 
same. So as upon everie trifling occasion, they (like brute beasts) 
fix their furious eies upon the partie whom they bewitch. Hereby 
it commeth to passe, that whereas women having a mervellous fickle 
nature, what greefe so ever happeneth unto them, immediatlie all 
peaceablenes of mind departeth ; and they are so troubled with 
evill humors, that out go their venomous exhalations, ingendred 
thorough their ilfavoured diet, and increased by meanes of their 
pernicious excrements, which they expell. Women are also (saith 
he) monethlie filled full of superfluous humors, and with them/ 
the melancholike bloud boileth ; whereof spring vapors, and are 
carried up, and conveied through the nosethrels and mouth, &c : to 
the bewitching of whatsoever it meeteth. For they belch up a 
certeine breath, wherewith they bewitch whomsoever they list. And 
of all other women, leane, hollow eied, old, beetlebrowed women 
(saith he) are the most infectious. Marie he saith, that hot, subtill, 
and thin bodies are most subject to be bewitched, if they be moist, 
and all they generallie, whose veines, pipes, and passages of their 
bodies are open. And finallie he saith, that all beautifuU things 
whatsoever, are soone subject to be bewitched ; as namelie goodlie 
yoongmen, faire women, such as are naturallie borne to be rich, goodlie 
beasts, faire horsses, ranke corne, beutifuU trees, &c. Yea a freend 
200. 
L. Vair. lib. de 
fascin. i. c. 12. 
Much like 
the eiebi- 
ting wit- 
ches, of 
whom we 
have els- 
where 
spoken. 
379- 
Who are 
most likelie 
to bewitch, 
and to be 
bewitched.

--- PAGE 326 ---
I
228 12 Booke. The discoverie '
of his told him, that he saw one with his eie breake a pretious stone 
in peeces. And all this he telleth as soberlie, as though it were true. 
And if it were true, honest women maie be witches, in despight of 
all inquisitors : neither can anie avoid being a witch, except shee 
locke hir selfe up in a chamber. 
197 [2] 
L. Vair. lib. de 
fascin. i. ca. 5. 
280. 
* According 
to Ovids sai- 
eng of Pro- 
teus & Me- 
dea, which he 
indeed al- 
ledgeth 
therefore, 
Nii7ic aqua, 
nunc ales, 
modb bos, 
modb cer- 
vus abibat. 
The xxi. Chapter. 
What miracles witchmon^ers report to have beene done by witches 
words, dr'c: contradictions of witchmongers among themselves, 
how beasts are cured herby, of bewitched butter, a charme against 
witches, and a counter charme, the effect of charmes and words 
proved by L. Vairus to be woonderfull. 
F I should go about to recite all charmes, I should take 
an infinite worke in hand. For the witching writers 
hold opinion, that anie thing al/most maie be therby 
brought to passe ; & that whether the words of the 
charme be understandable or not, it skilleth not : so the charmer 
have a steddie intention to bring his desire about. And then what 
is it that cannot be done by words ? For L. Vairus saith, that old 
women have infeebled and killed children with words, and have 
made women with child miscarrie ;/ they have made men pine awaie 
to death, they have killed horsses, deprived sheepe of their milke, 
*transformed men into beasts, flowne in the aire, tamed and staied 
wild beasts, driven all noisome cattell and vermine from come, vines 
and hearbs, staied serpents, &c : and all with words. In so much 
as he saith, that with certeine words spoken in a bulles eare by a 
witch, the bull hath fallen downe to the ground as dead. Yea some 
by vertue of words have gone upon a sharpe sword, and walked upon 
hot glowing coles, without hurt ; with words (saith he) verie heavie 
weights and burthens have beene lifted up ; and with words wild 
horsses and wild bulles have beene tamed, and also mad dogs ; with 
words they have killed wormes, and other vermine, and staied all 
maner of bleedings and fluxes : with words all the diseases in mans 
bodie are healed, and wounds cured ; arowes are with wonderfuU 
strangenesse and cunning plucked out of mens bones. Yea (saith 
he) there be manie that can heale all bitings of dogs, or stingings of 
serpents, or anie other poison : and all with nothing but words 
spoken. And that which is most strange, he saith, that they can 
remedie anie stranger, and him that is absent, with that verie sword 
wherewith they are wounded. Yea and that which is beyond all

