lls of the Temple, Inner 
or Middle, or in those of Lincoln's or Gray's Inn. 
And in taking leave of this portion of my subject, I cannot but 
reiterate the obligations both the reader and the literary world gene- 
rally are under to Mr. Edmund Ward Oliver. The suppositions as 
to the cause of Scot's loss of his moiety of the estates of Lady Winni- 
fred Rainsford — not, it is believed, a large sum — and as to his law- 
studentship, based as they are on facts stated by Scot or derived from 
dd

--- PAGE 36 ---
XXVI 
Introduction. 
his writings, and those of Th. Ady, are my own ; while in one or two 
instances I have put forth opinions not quite in accord with that 
gentleman's. But nearly all the biographical facts regarding Scot 
himself and his marriages, in contradistinction to the supposed facts 
hitherto set forth, are due to the intelligent research of Mr. Oliver, 
and are not unfrequently stated in his own words. 
The following table will bring into one view the pedigree of Reginald 
Scot given in the previous pages : 
[The 2nd] Sir William Scott,* d. 1433.= 
Sir John Scott, d. 1485.= 
Sir William Scott, d. i$2^.= 
 ^1 
i 
Sir John Scott, d. 7 Oct. 1 533.=|=Anne, d. of Reginald Pympe. 
Wm. Scott, Sir Reginald Scott, Richd. Scott.=Mary Whete- 
d. J./. 5 June d. 16 Dec. 1554. 
1536. 
nail. 
Sir Th. Scot, (i) Jane Cobbe.— Reginald Scott.=(2) Alice [Collyar?]. 
d. 30 Dec. 1594. I 
Elizabeth. =Sackville Tumor. 
I 
Cicely. 
* It is noteworthy that, notwithstanding the memorial inscription to the first 
Sir William, Reginald, or whoever was the author of the verses to Sir Thomas, 
only traces the pedigree to this fourth knight after Sir Reginald. Either then 
the first Sir William was then accounted somewhat mythical, or not being a 
knight of fame, he was not recognised as the same with Sir William Scott, 
the Chief Justice of England.

--- PAGE 37 ---
Introduction. 
xxvii 
WILL OF RAYNOLD SCOT. 
Extracted from the copy, not the ortgitial, in the Principal Registry 
of the Probate, Divorce, and Admiralty Division of the High 
Court of Justice. 
S In the Prerogative Court of Canterbury. 
In the Name of God Amen, I Raynolde Scott in the Countie of 
Kent gent beinge of the Parish of Smeth Doe make and ordaine 
and w"' myne owne hande doe write this my Last will and Testament 
on Saturdaye the fyfteenth of September Anno Dfii a thousand fyve 
hundred nyntie nyne and in the fortie one yeare of the raigne of o"" 
soveraigne Ladie Queene Elizabeth Fyrst I bequeath my Sowle to 
Almightie god and my body to be buryed as yt shall seeme good to 
Alice my wiefe whome I make and ordaine to be myne onely 
Executrix Item I bequeath to my sayde wief All my goods and chattells 
plate housholde stuffe Juelles and Chaynes with all my leases and 
goods moveable and vnmoveable savinge such as I shall by this my 
Will other Wise dispose of Item I (for the trust I repose in M""- 
Edwarde Hall of Ashforde and of my neighbou"" Raynolde Keale of 
Smeeth in countie aforesaide doe make them two the overseers to 
this my Last will and gyve to eyther of thew for theire paines and 
trouble w"^** they ar like to sustaine herebye fyve poundes Item I 
bequeath to S^ John Scott my lease of the banke or pond at Aldinge 
Item I bequeath to my graund childe Cisley Turno'' tenne poundes 
to buy her a little Chaine \\em. I gyve to my daughter in Lawe Marie 
Collyar six poundes thirteene shillings foure pence to be paide unto 
her within one quarter after my decease, to be bestowed in apparell 
upon her selfe as she shall seeme good nether would I have her 
mothers hand anie thinge the shorter towardes her in that respect 
Item I give to my daughter Turno"^ the Covenant that I have of my 
Cozen Charles Scott touchinge the renuinge of my lease when his 
grace doth renne \read renue] his lease of Braborne Rectorie pro- 
vided that my meaninge is, that my said wief shall enioye the full 
tearme that I nowe possesse and howsoever yt shalbe renued my 
daughter shall have the only renuinge which shalbe in effecte after 
the whole tearme w"^'^ I holde now be expired so as by any meane 
[intervening] renuinge my saide wief be not defeated of my true 
meaninge towardes her Item I do bequeath to my saied wief and to 
her heires for ever All my Landes Lyinge in Aldington and now in 
thoccupac/on of John Pollard and all my Landes in Ruckinge in 
thoccupac/on of Diggons and all my Landes in Sellenge in the 
occupaczbn of Coakar All which Landes lye in the sayde sayde* 
Countie of Kent Item I gyve and bequeath to my said wief all my 
other Landes in Rumney Marshe or els where in the said countye 
* Sic, first at end of line. 
+ Sic, to be paide is interlined above this.

--- PAGE 38 ---
xxviii 
Introdiiciion. 
duiinge her naturall lieff Item I doe gyve to my Servante Moyll 
Smyth the some of twentie shillinges yearelie duringe his nrt/?^rall Life 
to be paide out of all my Landes halfe yearelie and that for defaulte 
of payment yt shalbe Lawfull for him to distraine And so I ende 
desyreinge the worlde to iudge the best hereof and of the consy- 
derac/ons for greate is the trouble my poore wief hath had with me, 
and small is the comforte she hath receyved at my handes whome yf 
I had not matched w^'' all I had not dyed worth one groate. — 
Ray: Scott. 
By a short notice following the copy of the will, it was proved on 
the 22nd November 1599. There is also a document setting forth 
that Alicia Scott, relicta, and Elizabetha Turnor, als Scott, filia 
naturalis et legitima, had disputed, before certain functionaries named 
regarding the will, and that probate was granted as aforesaid on the 
22nd November 1599. But as the cause or subject of the dispute is 
not mentioned, this, like the short notice, is not given. 
ABSTRACT OF INQUIS. POST MORTEM, 18 ELIZ. p. i. 
No. 84, 
Inquisition taken at Maidstone on the death of Lady Wynifred 
Rainsfoord, 30 March, 18 Eliz. [1575-6]. 
She was seised of the Manors of Nettlested and Hikes with 
appurtenances in E. and W. Peckham, Brenchley, W. Barmling, 
Merewood, Marden ; also of the Manor of Pympe with appurtenances 
in Yaulding, Marden, and Brenchley. Also various other lands, 
some of which, called Stockenbury, Motelands, and Souchefields, are 
in Brenchley. 
She died 17 Oct. last, at Chelmsford in Essex. 
Th. Scott, kt., is her next heir, viz., son and heir of Reginalde 
Scotte, kt., Sonne and heir of Anne Scotte, wife of John Scotte, kt., 
daughter and heir of Reginald Pympe, brother of John Pympe, 
father of said Lady Winifred. 
Thomas Scotte, kt., Charles Scott, Henry Scotte, George Scotte, 
and William Scotte [brothers of the first-named Thomas Scotte, kt.], 
and Reginald Scotte, are coheirs of the lands held in gavelkind. One 
moiety thereof descends to Thomas, Charles, etc. [as named above], 
sons and coheirs of Reginalde Scotte, kt., son and heir of Anne 
Scotte ; and the other moiety to Reginald, son and heir of Richard 
Scotte, junior, son of the said Anne.

--- PAGE 39 ---
Introduction. 
XXIX 
Thomas miles is 39 et amplius, Charles 34 [etc.], Henry 32 [etc.], 
George 30 [etc.], William 22 [etc.], and Reginald 38 years of age et 
amplius. 
The exact words regarding the co-heirs are: " descendebant et de 
jure descendere debent prasfato Thomas Scotte militi, Carolo Scott, 
Henrico Scotte, Georgio Scotte et Will'o Scotte, fratribus dicti 
Thomas Scotte militis et Reginaldo Scotte, consanguineo prasdicti 
Thomae Scotte militis, ut consanguineis et coheredibus prjedictae 
dominae Winifridas eo quod prasdictae terrae .... ultimo recitata 
sunt de natura de gavelkind." This disproves the assertion of Mr. J. 
Renat Scott in Arch. Cant., xi, 388, and repeated in his genealogy of 
the Scott family, that the Reginald Scott mentioned in the former as 
receiving pay among those appointed in 1587-8 was "a son of Sir 
Thomas". 
ABSTRACT OF INQUIS. P.M., 45 ELIZ., pars, i. No. 71. 
Inqtdsition taken at Maidstone, 2 Dec. [1602], after the death of 
Reginald Scot, getierosus. 
He was seised of a tenement and 20 acres of land called Grayne- 
courtte, held of Th. Scott, Esq., as of his manor of Brabourne, a 
tenement called Essex, and 20 acres of land in two parcels in AUing- 
ton [Aldington], held of Edw. Hall, as of his manor of Pawlson. 
One parcel of land called Haythorne field, containing 20 acres in 
Bonington, held of the Queen in capite, and a tenement and one 
parcel of land lying in Barefield, containing two acres in Brabourne, 
tenure unknown, and one acre in Brabourne and 5 acres in Brabourne, 
and two parcels in Smeeth, and 30 acres of marsh called Gatesleaf, 
in Newchurch, held of Martin Barneham, Esq., as of his manor of 
Bylsyngton. 
He died 9 Oct., 41 Eliz. [1599], at Smeeth. 
Elizabeth, wife of Sackville Turner, gent., is his daughter and next 
heir, and was 28 years of age and more at his death. 
Alice, his widow, has received the rents since his death. 
[Elizabeth was the next heir to his own property, but that which 
was his own through his wife Alice, he specially devised "to her and 
to her heirs".]

--- PAGE 40 ---
Introdxution. 
Tlie Cause and History of the Work. — That is, what induced Scot 
to write it, and why did he set it forth as he did ? inquiries which in- 
volve, among other matters, a short notice of the position then and 
previously held by witchcraft in England. His Hoppe-garden shows 
him to us as a man of intelligence, foresighted and reflective of thought, 
and desirous of improving the state of his country and countrymen. 
It shows him also as one who could not only seize a thought and 
commend it to others, but as one who had perseveringly put his idea 
into practice, found it feasible, and then so learnt the pr,ocesses neces- 
sary for growing the plant, and preparing its catkins and storing them 
for use, that a priori one would suppose that he had done what he did 
not, namely, visited Holland and learnt the processes on the spot. 
The same qualities are seen in his Witchcraft^ as is also his indepen- 
dence of thought. No sooner had his suspicions been aroused than he 
proceeded, as shown by the work and its references, to investigate the 
matter thoroughly and perseveringly. To this also he was encouraged, 
or rather led, by yet other two qualities, his straightforwardness or 
honesty of purpose, and his compassion, for these taught him that he 
was engaged in a righteous work, that of rescuing feeble and ignorant, 
though it may be too pretentious and shrewish, old women from false 
charges and a violent death, and in a noble work in endeavouring to 
stem the torrent of superstition and cruelty which was then beginning 
to overflow the land. 
Nor was this the result in any way of a mind sceptically inclined. 
His book shows that he accepted the opinions of his day, unless he 
had been led to inquire into them, and either re-receive them as 
facts or discard them. Led doubtless by his academic training, it is 
abundantly clear that he had inquired into the grounds of his belief 
in the Established Church, and into the additions that had been made 
to its faith in the course of illiterate ages by the Popish Church. He 
had read Plotina, who taught him that the so-called vicars of Christ 
and his vice-gerents on earth were often devils incarnate and stan- 
dard-bearers of vice, and that the system which did now and again 
produce a St. Francis d'Assis — all reverence to his name — produced 
also the congeners of Loyola, and Loyola himself, whose followers, 
while assuming to themselves the holy name of Socii Jesu, made that 
name famous and infamous, and their tenets execrated throughout the

--- PAGE 41 ---
Introduction. 
xxxi 
civilised world. But he accepted with some doubting, having, as he 
thought, great authority for it and no means of investigation, the story 
of the Remora ; and accepted without doubtmg the beliefs that the bone 
of a carp's head, and none other, staunched blood, the value of the 
unicorn's horn, and the like, and — notwithstanding his disbelief in 
astrology — that seed-time and springing were governed by the waxing 
and waning of the moon. He also believed that precious stones 
owed their origin to the influences of the heavenly bodies; and besides 
his credulous beliefs as to certain waters, narrated at the commence- 
ment, he in the next chapter gives the absurdly wonderful virtues of 
these stones, some, as he says, believed in by him, " though many 
things most false are added". 
How then came he to inquire into and write so strongly against 
witchcraft 
Before the time of the eighth Henry, sorcerers were dealt 
with by the ecclesiastical law, which punished them as heretics. 
Moreover, their supposed offences against the person seem, chiefly at 
least, to have been taken notice of when they were supposed to inter- 
fere with high or state matters or persons, as in the cases of Joan of 
Arc or Dame Eleanor Cobham. But in Henry's time, probably 
through the extension of continental ideas, aided, it may be, by a 
desire to restrain the ecclesiastical power, c. 8 of the thirty-third year 
of his reign was passed. By this it was enacted, that witches, etc., 
who destroyed their neighbours, and made pictures [images] of them 
for magical purposes, or for the same purposes made crowns, swords, 
and the like, or pulled down crosses, or declared where things lost or 
stolen were become, should suffer death and loss of lands and goods, 
as felons, and lose the privileges of clergy and sanctuary. Afterwards, 
by I Edw. I, c. 12, this and other offences first made felonies in 
Henry's time were no longer to be accounted such. Thirdly, in the 
fifth year of Elizabeth, Parliament, by its twelfth chapter, enacted, 
that whereas many have practised sorceries to the destruction of 
people and their goods, those that cause death shall suffer as was de- 
clared by 33 Henry VIII, c. 8, except that their wives and heirs shall 
not have their rights affected by such attainder. But that when a 
person was only injured, or their goods or cattle destroyed, the 
offenders should for the first offence suffer a year's imprisonment, and 
once a quarter be exposed in the pillory in a market town for six

--- PAGE 42 ---
XXX 1 1 
Introduction. 
hours, and there confess their offences ; and for the second offence 
suffer death as felons, with the exceptions before rehearsed. While 
any who seek treasure, or would bring about unlawful love, or hurt any- 
one in his body or goods, should for a first offence be imprisoned and 
suffer as before, and for a second be imprisoned for life and forfeit 
his goods and cattle. This, so far as humanity is concerned, is a 
distinct advance on Henry's enactment, though an apparent going 
back from that of Edward. Perhaps, as before, it arose from a desire 
to remove the offences from the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical law, 
which would have burnt them, nor, as evidenced by its little results, 
does it seem to have been made through any mania or scare in the 
matter. This came on later, when, as we are told by Brian Darcie 
in 1582, at what time, under pie-crust promises of favour, he was 
endeavouring to get women to confess, and then be hanged, — " there 
is a man of great learning and knowledge come over lately into our 
Queenes Majestic, which hath advertised her what a companie and 
numbers of Witches be within Englande : whereupon I and other of 
her Justices have received Commission for the apprehending of as 
many as are within these limites." Alas, this man of great learning 
and knowledge seems to have been none other than that otherwise 
light of the English Church, the great, good, and pious Bishop Jewel, 
who, having returned from a forced residence abroad, was speedily 
promoted by her Majesty, and in a sermon preached before her, in 
1572, brought in the subject as follows: — 
" Heere perhaps some man will replie, that witches, and conjurers 
often times chase away one Divell by the meane of another. Possible 
it is so ; but that is wrought, not by power, but by Collusion of the 
Divels. For one Divell, the better to attaine his purpose, will give 
place, and make as though he stood in awe of another Uivell. And 
by the way to touch but a word or two of this matter for that the 
horrible using of your poore subjects inforceth thereunto. It may 
please your Grace to understand, that this kind of people, I meenes 
witches and sorcerers, within these few last yeeres, are marvellously 
increased within this your Grace's realme. These eies have scene 
most evident and manifest marks of their wickednesse. Your Grace's 
subjects pine away even unto the death, their collour fadeth, their 
flesh rotteth, their speech is benummed, their senses are bereft."

--- PAGE 43 ---
Introduction. 
" Wherefore, your poore subjects most humble petition unto your 
Highnesse, is, that the lawes touching such malefactours, may be put 
in due execution. For the shole of them is great, their doings hor- 
rible, their malice intollerable, the examples most miserable. And I 
pray God, they never practise further, then upon the subject. But 
this only by the way, these be the scholers of Beelzebub the chief 
captaine of the Divels." 
The plantings of the Queen in the commissions of her Justices thus 
instigated and encouraged, produced an abundant crop. According 
to the Dedications of Scot, Sir Roger Manwood, Lord Chief Baron of 
the Exchequer, had had " in these causes such experience", A ii. v., 
while Sir Thomas Scot, as Justice of the Peace, had also had "manie 
poore old women convented before him for .... witchcraft", A. vi. 
Various booklets also, presently to be spoken of more at large, excited 
still more the imaginations of a credulous people, and it had been 
supposed, before Scot wrote, as will be seen on p. 473, and in my note 
on that page, that the Queen's person had been aimed at in that way. 
It thus appears that though Scot may have been brought up in a 
traditional but little-regarded belief in witchcraft, he, when he was at 
least thirty-four, was not only unprepared, but startled, to witness and 
take part in this new departure from justice and mercy. Witchcraft, 
chiefly looked on as useful in discovering things lost, or in bringing a 
wished-for sweetheart to return the love of the seeker, or in curing 
ailments simple or grievous, became feared, reviled, and sought out: 
sought out by Commission of the Queen, sought out by the people as 
a great and fearful evil rapidly overspreading the land, and able and 
willing, like the Plague and Black Death, to count its victims by 
thousands, and from the cottage to the throne itself He, a man both 
intelligent and compassionate, sees poor, old, decrepit creatures eking 
out a miserable livelihood by begging an occasional dole from their 
better off neighbours ; ill-tempered by age and condition, and there- 
fore abusive when refused such dole, or on slighter causes, sometimes 
perhaps through old knowledge or superstition, but probably more 
often for the sake of gain, pretending to be wise above what is known ; 
he sees these accused of selling their souls for the sake of such a 
position in the world, he hears them accused sometimes of foul, more 
frequently of unlikely, crimes and acts, nay, such as an unprejudiced 
e e

--- PAGE 44 ---
XXXIV 
Introduction. 
common sense must laugh at, while the evidence is nearly always so 
faulty that, were the accusation a different one, it would be at once 
turned inside out and thrown aside. Unfortunately, too, some of 
these old women being more or less mad, and others driven through 
fear on the one hand, or through promised favour on the other, 
confess themselves capable of doing these things, though any man of 
sense and observation could detect their state or motives. Luckily, 
too, he had had close to him, and in his wife's family, the known and 
talked-of imposture of the Holy Maid of Kent ; and in his own time 
and close to his own door, the case of the Pythonist of Westwell, at 
first carried out triumphantly, and then, on her own confession and 
her rc-acted acts, branded as an impostor, like the Holy Maid. The 
Dutchman, too, at Maidstone, after being set forth as a worker of 
miracles and an exorcist, was found to be a rogue; and "manie other 
such miracles had beene latelie printed, whereof diverse had beene 
bewraied." He had taken part also — apparently as one engaged for 
the defence — in that piece of folly called the trial of Margaret .Simons, 
and knew the history of Ade Davie, and of her restoration to sanity 
without exorcism, hanging, or burning. 
Is it not natural that his suspicions, and more than suspicions, 
should have been aroused, and that he should have been thus led 
to take up the whole subject seriously? One who had given himself 
up, as Wood says, to reading and thought as well as to healthy and 
useful exercise, must have sought for and obtained books on either 
side of the subject, and in especial the known book of Wier ; and 
thoughtful reading of these, and meditation must have led him to 
extend his views, and gather them into a harmonious and consistent 
whole. Meanwhile, however, the bloodthirsty superstition daily in- 
creased, and there were published first, the mad book or books of 
Richard Gallis — spoken of in pp. 132-3 — of the witches at Windsor, 
now, I believe, unfortunately lost, where, among other things, he 
narrates how, at a Sabbath meeting, he had a hand-to-hand encounter 
with the devil, and wounded him so sore that he stank of brimstone; 
and in 1582, there took place the wholesale condemnation of the poor 
old women of St. Osees, thirteen I believe of whom were hanged. 
There had been no such condemnation before in England. It is not 
unlikely that he himself witnessed their condemnation — see pp. xxv-vi.

--- PAGE 45 ---
I ntroduction. 
XXXV 
So unusual was it, that — as I cannot but believe on other evidence, as 
stated in my noting on Macbeth — a ballad was written on it, which 
became very commonly known, and was remembered as late as 1606. 
This same unusual breadth of punishment also created so much 
attention that Justice Brian Uarcie thought it worth while to set forth 
in print, not the trial, but the depositions taken before him, and thus 
inform a too ignorant public that he and he alone was the primary 
cause of such a purification. 
These facts, and especially this last, aroused, I believe, Scot's 
compassion and indignation, and made both find vent in printed 
words. And besides these likelihoods, including that of date, there 
are two at first sight seemingly contradictory facts, which made them- 
selves manifest to me when I first carefully read the book, and before 
I had formed any opinion on their causes, and which are on this view 
reconciled. These facts are, that while the plan which he has adopted, 
and his facts and conclusions, seem to have been deliberately sought 
out, thought over, and canvassed, there are evidences throughout of 
a feverous haste of composition, such feverous haste as the above 
spoken of emotions would excite in a man like Scot, who had wit- 
nessed so horrible and so bloody a perversion of justice. The proof 
of the first fact I leave to be observed by the intelligent reader ; but 
while the second must also be observed by him, it is needful, to the 
full exposition of my argument, that I should collect in one view most 
at least of the details. This haste is evidenced in some of his cor- 
rected errata, but more in those that he did not correct. Thus we have, 
on p. 174, a curious slip, by which Pharaoh becomes a Persian, and 
Nebuchadnezzar takes Pharaoh's place as an Egyptian king, for other 
parts of the book prove conclusively that this was an unintentional 
lapsus, and one a second time overlooked when the book was re-read 
before the title-page and the preliminary leaves were set up. Similar 
are his errors as to Haias and Sedaias, for at one time he speaks of 
Rabbi Sedaias Haias, repeating it also at the last when he gives his 
" forren authors" consulted, and between these speaks of them as two 
persons, as they were. More especially would I call attention to his 
blunders as to Argerius Ferrerius. He quotes him— yet he is always 
Ferr^rius — five times in his text, twice in his table of contents, and 
once in his "authors used". So in his translation from him, the "s" of

