n make a circle, and 
call up the spirit with great intention, and holding a ring in your 
hand, rehearse in your owne name, and your companions (for one 
must alwaies be with you) this/ praier following, and so no spirit shall jg4. 
annoie you, and your purpose shall take effect. JAnd note how this [t This not in 
agreeth with popish charmes and conjurations. Wier] 
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ the ^ father >^ and the 
Sonne ^ and the Holie-ghost holie trinitie and unseparable unitie.

--- PAGE 426 ---
32! 
15. Booke. 
TJie discoverie 
[* goods. 
Through, Wicr'\ 
Note what 
names are 
attributed 
unto Christ 
by the con- 
juror in this 
his exorci- 
sing exer- 
cise. 
395- 279. 
[t Vigedara, 
Wier] 
[t Ysyesy, Wier] 
(§ Elhroch, Wier] 
[II ehan her, 
Wier] 
What won- 
derful! 
force con- 
jurors doo 
I call upon thee, that thou maiest be my salvation and defense, and 
the protection of my bodie and soule, and of all my goods* through the 
vertue of thy holie crosse, and through the vertue of thy passion, I 
beseech thee O Lord Jesus Christ, by the merits of thy blessed mother 
S. Marie, and of all thy saints, that thou give me grace and divine 
power over all the wicked spirits, so as which of them soever I doo 
call by name, they may come by and by from everie coast, and 
accomplish my will, that they neither be hurtfull nor fearefull unto 
me, but rather obedient and diligent about me. And through thy 
vertue streightlie commanding them, let them fulfill my commande- 
ments. Amen. Holie, holie, holie, Lord God of sabboth, which wilt 
come to judge the quicke and the dead, thou which art A and fl, first 
and last. King of kings and Lord of lords, loth, A^lanabrath, El, 
Ahiel, Anathiel, Ainazim, Sedomel, Gayes, Hell, Messias, Tolh7ti, 
Elias, Ischiros, Athanatos, Iinas. By these thy holie names, and by 
all other I doo call upon thee, and beseech thee O Lord Jesus Christ, 
by thy nativitie and baptisme, by thy crosse and passion, by thine 
ascension, and by the comming of the Holie-ghost, by the bitternesse 
of thy soule when it departed from thy bodie, by thy five wounds, by 
the bloud and water which went out of thy bodie, by thy vertue, by 
the sacrament which thou gavest thy disciples the daie before thou 
sufferedst, by the holie trinitie, and by the inseparable unitie, by 
blessed Marie thy mother, by thine angels, archangels, prophets, 
patriarchs, and by all thy saints, and by all the sacraments which are 
made in thine honour, I doo worship and beseech thee, I blesse and 
desire thee, to accept these praiers, conjurations, and words of my 
mouth, which I will use. I require thee O Lord Jesus Christ, that 
thou give me thy vertue & power over all thine angels (which were 
throwne downe from heaven to deceive mankind) to drawe them to 
me, to tie and bind them, & also to loose them, to gather them togither 
before me, & to command them to doo all that they can, and that by 
no meanes they con/temne my voice, or the words of my mouth ;/ but 
that they obeie me and my saiengs, and feare me. I beseech thee by 
thine humanitie, mercie and grace, and I require thee Adonay, Amay, 
Horta, Vege\ dora, Mitai, Hel, Suranat, Ysion, Vsesy,t and by all thy 
holie names, and by all thine holie he saints and she saints, by all thine 
angels and archangels, powers, dominations, andvertues, and by that 
name that Salomon did bind the divels, and shut them up, Elhrach,% 
\Ebanher, Agle, Goth, loth, Othie, Venoch, Nabrat, and by all thine 
holie names which are written in this booke, and by the vertue of 
them all, that thou enable me to congregate all thy spirits throwne 
downe from heaven, that they may give me a true answer of all my 
demands, and that they satisfie all my requests, without the hurt of

--- PAGE 427 ---
of Witchcraft. ch.-i,,. 5. 329 
my bodie or soule, or any thing else that is mine, through our Lord heieeve 
- ^1 • , 1 • , 1- 1 1 ■ 1-11 -1 cosisleth in 
Jesus Christ thy sonne, which hveth and reigneth with thee m the these for- 
unitie of the Hohe-ghost, one God world without end. ofChriTf* ■ 
Oh father omnipotent, oh wise sonne, oh Holie-ghost, the searcher 
of harts, oh you three in persons, one true godhead in substance, 
which didst spare Adam and Eve in their sins; and oh thou sonne, 
which diedst for their sinnes a most filthie death, susteining it upon 
the holie crosse ; oh thou most mercifull, when I flie unto thy mercie, 
and beseech thee by all the means I can, by these the holie names of 
thy sonne ; to wit, A and O, and all other his names, grant me thy 
vertue and power, that I may be able to cite before me, thy spirits 
which were throwne downe from heaven, & that they may speake 
with me, & dispatch by & by without delaie, & with a good will, & 
without the hurt of my bodie, soule, or goods, &c : as is contained in 
the booke called Annulus Salomonis. 
Oh great and eternall vertue of the highest, which through dispo- 
sition, these being called to judgement, *Vaicheon, Stimulamaton, [*Rom.] 
Esphares, Tetragrammaton, Oltoram, ACryon, Esytion, Exisiion, [t mon, Wier] 
Eriona, Onela, Brasim, Noym, Messias, Soier, Emanuel, Sabboih, 
Adonay, I worship thee, I invocate thee, I Jimploie thee with all the [t implore, 
strength of my mind, that by thee, my present praiers, consecrations, ^"''^ 
and conjurations be hallowed : and whersoever wicked spirits are 
called, in the vertue of thy names, they may come togither from everie 
coast, and diligentlie fulfill the will of me the exorcist. %Fiat, fiat, [§ ital.^ 
fiat, Amen.l 
The fift Chapter. 396. 
A confutation of the manifold vanities conteined in the precedent 
chapters, speciallie of commanding of divels. 
E that can be persuaded that these things are true, or 
wrought indeed according to the assertion of couseners, 
or according to the supposition of witchmongers & papists, 
may soone be brought to beleeve that the moone is made 
of greene cheese. You see in this which is called Salomons conjura- 
tion, there is a perfect inventarie registred of the number of divels, of 
their names, of their offices, of their personages, of their qualities, of 
their powers, of their properties, of their kingdomes,/ of their govern- 280. 
ments, of their orders, of their dispositions, of their subjection, of 
their submission, and of the waies to bind or loose them : with a note "^^l^ 'f '^^ 
1111 trane to 
what wealth, learning, office, commoditie, pleasure, &c : they can the scnp- 
U U

--- PAGE 428 ---
330 
15. Bocike. 
TJie discoverie 
ture, which 
saith thai 
everie good 
gift com- 
meth from 
the father 
of light, &c. 
A breviarie 
of the in- 
ventarie of 
spirits. 
The au- 
thors fur- 
ther pur- 
pose in the 
detection 
of cOjuring. 
give, and may be forced to yeeld in spight of their harts, to such (for- 
sooth) as are cunning in this art : of whome yet was never seene any 
rich man, or at least that gained any thing that waie ; or any un- 
learned man, that became learned by that meanes ; or any happie 
man, that could with the helpe of this art either deliver himselfe, or 
his freends, from adversitie, or adde unto his estate any point of 
felicitie: yet these men, in all worldlie happinesse, must needs exceed 
all others ; if such things could be by them accomplished, according 
as it is presupposed. For if they may learne of Marbas, all secrets, 
and to cure all diseases ; and of Furcas, wisdome, and to be cunning 
in all mechanicall arts ; and to change anie mans shape, of Zepar : if 
Butie can make them rich and eloquent, if Beroth can tell them of all 
things, present, past, and to come ; if Asmodaie can make them go 
invisible and shew them all hidden treasure ; if Salmacke will afflict 
whom they list, & Allocer can procure them the love of any woman ; 
'\l Amy can provide them excellent familiars, if Caym can make them 
understand the voice of all birds and beasts, and Buer and Bifrons 
397- can make them live long ; and finallie, if OriasI could procure unto 
them great friends, and reconcile their enimies, & they in the end 
had all these at commandement ; should they not live in all worldlie 
honor and felicitie.'* whereas contrariwise they lead their lives in all 
obloquie, miserie, and beggerie, and in fine come to the gallowes ; as 
though they had chosen unto themselves the spirit Valefer, who they 
sale bringeth all them with whom he entreth into familiaritie, to no 
better end than the gibet or gallowes. But before I proceed further 
to the confutation of this stuffe, I will shew other conjurations, de- 
vised more latelie, and of more authoritie ; wherein you shall see how 
fooles are trained to beleeve these absurdities, being woone 
by little and little to such credulitie. For the author 
heereof beginneth, as though all the cunning 
of conjurors were derived and fetcht 
from the planetarie motions, 
and true course of the 
stars, celestiall 
bodies, 
&c./

--- PAGE 429 ---
of IVitc/icra/L 
Chap. 6. 331 
The vi. Chapter. 281. 
The names of the planets, their characters, toi^ither with the 
twelve signes of the zodiake, their dispositions, aspects, 
and government, with other observations. 
Conjuriaion ^ 2 5 T, V cf £ 5 5 ». 'lie charjfttrs of tbt Plantts. 
Q^Jrat □ J \^'""- ^i"'' ^"'f ycf't Ucrcu. Zxw. 
Th£|twclve Cgnes of the zodkke, their diara- . 
Acnamldcnon-iiniuajiSiKc. . 
r « n s 51 tee 
fij ri V IT =3 K 
TJbra tsofph St^tur'nu Cafricomit Aqutriui Pi/its. 
Their difpofaions orinclinationj. 
rsa^Good > 3 iCiin.vi> ^BviU > £ ssins ^S.gncs in- 
X «" yGgnes/ 5" ? =: n $ fignts. f i K W f different. 
Y* rf* Very good fi^nes. V '^SltS Veiy evHl fignci.

--- PAGE 430 ---
332 
15. Booke. 
The discoverie 
3g8. 282. 
The disposition of the planets. 
TrtpHcii 
0£ 
2e 
•He. 
■tie- 
S0 
or z 
Trtpricv. 
The five 
planetarie 
aspects : 
Conjunct. 
Sextil. 
Trine. 
Quartil. 
Opposit. 
The aspects of the planets. 
6 Is the best aspect, with good planets, and woorst with evill. 
* Is a meane aspect in goodnesse or badnesse. 
A Is verie good in aspect to good planets, & hurteth not in evill. 
□ This aspect is of enimitie not full perfect. 
S This aspect is of enimitie most perfect. 
How the daie is divided or distinguished. 
A daie naturall is the space of foure and twentie houres, accounting 
the night withall, and beginneth at one of the clocke after midnight. 
An artificial] daie is that space of time, which is betwixt the rising 
and falling of the © &c. All the rest is night, & beginneth at the 
© rising. 
Hereafter followeth a table, showing how the daie and the night is divided 
by houres, and reduced to the regiment of the planets.//

--- PAGE 431 ---
of Witchcraft. cuap. 6. 333 
Tlie divisiojt of the dale., and the planetarie jgg. 283. 
regiment. 
i 
r 2, 3 4 
7 8 9 10 11 
IZ 
1 
o 
/ 
o 
d 
s 
© 
© 
o 
Q 
(T 
o 
o 
C 
Q 
(T 
G 
1? 
o 
/ 
o 
77;^ division of the night, and the planetarie 
regiment. 
1 
3 4 
6 7 8 3 
lO 
11 
o 
V 
O 
s 
o 
(L 
o 
V 
0 
>^ 
r> 
c 
o 
s 
r 
?>- 
<^ © 
c V \ 
© 
vJ 
— 3^ 
P- 
/ o 
c 
o 
C 
Vs 
4 
1? 
2^ 
<^ 
o 
\> 
i

--- PAGE 432 ---
'5- uooke. The discoverie 
400. 284. The seventh Chapter. 
The characicrs of the angels of the seaven dates, with their names . 
of figures, seales ajid periapts. 
[ist ed. ve\ 
f figtcres are called the seales of the earth, ^vithoiit the \ 
\ which no spirit will appeere, except thou have theui with thee. S / 
'

--- PAGE 433 ---
of WitcJicraft. 
Chap. 8 
;35 
401. 285. 
[fo - foe] 
The eight Chapter. 
Ati experiment of the dead. 
IRST fast and praie three daies, and absteine thee from 
all filthinesse ; go to one that is new buried, such a one 
as killed himselfe or destroied himselfe wilfullie : or else 
get thee promise of one that shalbe hanged, and let him 
sweare an oth to thee, after his bodie is dead, that his spirit shall 
come to thee, and doo thee true service, at thy commandements, in 
all daies, houres, and minuts. And let no persons see thy doings, but 
thy *fellow. And about eleven a clocke in the night, go to the place 
where he was buried, and sale with a bold faith & hartie desire, to 
have the spirit come that thou doost call for, thy fellow having a 
candle in his left hand, and in his right hand a christall stone, and 
saie these words following, the maister having a hazell wand in his 
right hand, and these names of God written thereupon, \Tetragrain- 
7naton Adonay ►{< Agla ►{< Cratoii Then strike three strokes on 
the ground, and saie ; Arise N. Arise N. Arise N. I conjure thee 
spirit N. by the resurrection of our Lord Jesu Christ, that thou doo 
obey to my words, and come unto me this night verelie and trulie, as 
thou beleevest to be saved at the daie of judgement. And I will 
sweare to thee an oth, by the perill of my soule, that if thou wilt 
come to me, and appeare to me this night, and shew me true 
visions in this christall stone, and fetch me the fairie Sibylia, that 
I may talke with hir visiblie, and she may come before me, as 
the conjuration leadeth : and in so dooing, I will give thee an/ 
Conjuring 
for a dead 
spirit. 
»For the 
cousenor 
(the conju- 
ror I should 
saie) can 
do nothing 
to any pur- 
pose with- 
out his co- 
federaLe- 
[t Rom.] 
Note that 
numerus 
ternarius, 
which is 
counted 
mysticall, 
be observed. 
402

--- PAGE 434 ---
136 
15. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Ex inferno 286. 
nulla rcdiiH- 
ftio, saith 
the scrip- 
ture : Ergo 
you lie 
quoth Nota. 
[• Rom.] 
403- 
* Damones 
credendo 
contremis- 
cunt. 
alinesse deed, and praie for thee N. to my Lord God, wherby thou 
maiest be restored to thy salvation at the resurrection daie, to 
be received as one of the elect of God, to the everlasting glorie, 
Amen. 
The maister standing at the head of the grave, his fellow having 
in his hands the candle and the stone, must begin the conjuration as 
followeth, and the spirit will appeare to you in the christall stone, 
in a faire forme of a child of twelve yeares of age. And when 
he is in, feele the stone, and it will be hot ; and feare nothing, 
for he or shee will shew manie delusions, to drive you from your 
worke. Feare God, but feare him not. This is to constraine him, as 
followeth. 
I conjure thee spirit A^. by the living God, the true God, and by 
the holie God, and by their vertues and powers which have created 
both thee and me, and all the world. I conjure thee N. by these 
holie names of God, * Tetragrammaion Adonay ^ Algrainay ^ 
Saday Sabaoth ^ Planaboth ^ Panthon ^ Craton ^ Neupmaton 
Deus Homo Omnipotens ►J* Sempiturnus Ysus »J< Terra 
^ Untgenitus <^ Salvator ^ Via ^ Vita ►{< Manus Pons »f< Origo 
►J< Filitis ►f" And by their vertues and powers, and by all their names, 
by the which God gave power to man, both to speake or 
thinke ; so by their vertues and powers I conjure thee spirit 
N. that now immediatlie thou doo appeare in this christall 
stone, visiblie to me and to my fellow, without anie tarrieng 
or deceipt. I conjure thee N. by the excellent name of Jesus 
Christ A and ^. the first and the last. For this holie name 
of Jesus is above all names : for in this name of Jesus 
everie knee dooth bow and obeie, both of heavenlie/ things, 
earthlie things, and infernall. And everie toong doth confesse, 
that our Lord Jesus Christ is in the glorie of the father : neither is 
there anie other name given to man, whereby he must be saved. 
Therefore in the name of Jesus of Nazareth, and by his nativitie, 
resurrection, and ascension, and by all that apperteineth unto his 
passion, and by their vertues and powers I conjure thee spirit A^. that 
thou doo appeare visiblie in this christall stone to me, and to my 
fellow, without anie dissimulation. I conjure thee N. by the bloud of 
the innocent lambe Jesus Christ, which was shed for us upon the 
crosse : for all those that* doo beieeve in the vertue of his bloud, 
shalbe saved. I conjure thee A', by the vertues and powers of all the 
riall names and words of the living God of me pronounced, that thou 
be obedient unto me and to my words rehearsed. If thou refuse this 
to doo, I by the holie trinitie, and their vertues and powers doo con- 
demne thee thou spirit A^. into the place where there is no hope of

--- PAGE 435 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Ch.ip. %. 
remedie or rest, but everlasting horror and paine there dwelling, and 
a place where is paine upon paine, dailie, horrihlie, and lamentablie, 
thy paine to be there augmented as the starres in the heaven, and as 
the graven or sand in the sea : except thou spirit N. doo appeare to 
me and to my fellow visiblie, immediatlie in this christall stone, and 
in a faire forme and shape of a child of twelve yeares of age, and that 
thou alter not thy shape, I charge thee upon paine of everlasting con- 
demnation. I conjure thee spirit N. by the golden girdle, which 
girded the loines of our Lord/ Jesus Christ : so thou spirit A', be thou 
bound into the perpetuall paines of hell fier, for thy disobedience and 
unreverent regard, that thou hast to the holie names and words, and 
his precepts. I conjure thee N. by the two edged sword, which Johti 
sawe proceed out of the mouth of the almightie ; and so thou spirit 
N. be torne and* cut in peeces with that sword, and to be condemned 
into everlasting paine, where the fier goeth not out, and where the 
worme dieth not. I conjure thee N. by the heavens, and by the 
celestiall citie of Jerusalem, and by the earth and the sea, and by all 
things conteined in them, and by their vertues & powers. I conjure 
thee spirit N. by the obedience that thou doost owe unto the principall 
prince. And except thou spirit N. doo come and appeare in this 
christall stone visiblie in my presence, here imme/diatlie as it is afore- 
said. Let the great cursse of God, the anger of God, the shadowe 
and darknesse of death, and of eternall condemnation be upon thee 
spirit N. for ever and ever ; bicause thou hast denied thy faith, thy 
health, & salvation. For thy great disobedience, thou art worthie to 
be condemned. Therefore let the divine trinitie, thrones, dominions, 
principals, potestats, virtutes, cherubim and seraphim, and all the 
soules of saints, both of men and women, condemne thee for ever, 
and be a witnesse against thee at the dale of judgement, bicause of 
thy disobedience. And let all creatures of our Lord Jesus Christ, saie 
thereunto; Fiat,Jiat,fiat : Amen. 
And when he is appeared in the christall stone, as is said before, 
bind him with this bond as followeth ; to wit, I conjure thee spirit A'', 
that art appeared to me in this christall stone, to me and to my fellow ; 
I conjure thee by* all the riall words aforesaid, the which did con- 
straine thee to appeare therein, and their vertues ; I charge thee spirit 
by them all, that thou shalt not depart out of this christall stone, 
untill my will being fulfilled, thou be licenced to depart. I conjure 
and bind thee spirit N. by that omnipotent God, which commanded 
the angell S. Michael to drive Lticifer out of the heavens with a 
sword of vengeance, and to fall from joy to paine ; and for dread of 
such paine as he is in, I charge thee spirit N. that thou shalt not go 
out of the christall stone ; nor yet to alter thy shape at this time, 
X X 
A heavie 
sentence 
denounced 
of the con- 
juror a- 
gainst the 
spirit in case 
of disobedi- 
ence, con- 
tempt, or 
negligence. 
287. 
[*] 
How can 
that be, 
when a spi- 
rit hath 
neither 
flesh, bloud, 
nor bones ? 
404. 
* The con- 
juror irapu- 
teth the ap- 
pearing of 
a spirit by 
constraint 
unto words 
quoth Nota.

--- PAGE 436 ---
338 is.Booke. The discoverie |
except I command thee otherwise ; but to come unto me at all places, \
and in all houres and minuts, when and wheresoever I shall call thee, 1
by the vertue of our Lord Jesus Christ, or by anie conjuration of ]
words that is written in this booke, and to shew me and my freends |
true visions in this christall stone, of anie thing or things that we |
would see, at anie time or times : and also to go and to fetch me the |
fairie Sibylia, that I may talke with hir in all kind of talke, as I shall 
call hir by anie conjuration of words conteined in this booke. I con- 
jure thee spirit N. by the great wisedome and divinitie of his godhead, \
my will to fulfill, as is aforesaid : I charge thee upon paine of con- 
demnation, both in this world, and in the world to come, Fiat, fiat, 
fiat: Amen. \
This done, go to a place fast by, and in a faire parlor or chamber, |
^05. make a circle with chalke, as hereafter followeth : and make/ another i
circle for the fairie Sibylia to appeare in, foure foote from the circle i
thou art in, & make no names therein, nor cast anie holie thing there- j
288. in, but/ make a circle round with chalke ; & let the maister and his \
fellowe sit downe in the first circle, the maister having the booke in !
his hand, his fellow having the christall stone in his right hand, |
looking in the stone when the fairie dooth appeare. The maister also j
must have upon his brest this figure here written in parchment, ]
and beginne to worke in the new of 
the ]) and in the houre of % the 0 
and the D to be in one of inhabi- ■ 
ters signes, as 05 ^ X- This bond \
as followeth, is to cause the spirit in |
the christall stone, to fetch unto thee 
the fairie Sibylia. All things fulfilled, 
beginne this bond as followeth, and \
be bold, for doubtles they will come \
before thee, before the conjuration i
be read seven times. j
I conjure thee spirit N. in this |
christall stone, by God the father, '
by God the sonne Jesus Christ, and by God the Holie-ghost, three 
persons and one God, and by their vertues. I conjure thee spirit, that 
thou doo go in peace, and also to come againe to me quicklie, and to j
And whie bring with thee into that circle appointed, Sibylia fairie, that I may 
might not talke with hir in those matters that shall be to hir honour and glorie ; 
he doo It . . :
himseife, as and SO I charge thee declare unto hir. I conjure thee spirit N. by the 
dam %^Ua. bloud of the innocent lambe, the which redeemed all the world ; by j
the vertue thereof I charge thee thou spirit in the christall stone, that !
thou doo declare unto hir this message. Also I conjure thee spirit ^

--- PAGE 437 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 8. 
A^. by all angels and archangels, thrones, dominations, principats, 
potestates, virtutes, cherubim and seraphim, and by their vertues and 
powers. I conjure the N. that thou doo depart with speed, and also 
to come againe with speed, and to bring with thee the fairie Sibylia, 
to appeare in that circle, before I doo read the conjuration in 
this booke seven times. Thus I charge thee my will to be ful- 
filled, upon paine of everlasting condemnation : Fiat, fiat, fiat ; 
Amen. 
Then the figure aforesaid pinned on thy brest, rehearse the words 
therein, and sale, Sorthie ^ Sorthia ^ Sorthios then beginne 
your conjuration as followeth here, and saie ; 1/ conjure thee Sibylia, 
0 gentle virgine of fairies, by the mercie of the Holie-ghost, and by 
the dreadfull daie of doome, and by their vertues and powers ; I con- 
jure thee Sibylia, O gentle virgine of fairies, and by all the angels 
of % and their characters and vertues, and by all the spirits of % and 
$ and their characters and vertues, and by all the characters that be 
in the firmament, and by the king and queene of fairies, and their 
vertues, and by the faith and obedience that thou bearest unto them. 
1 conjure thee Sibylia by the bloud that ranne out of the side of our 
Lord Jesus Christ crucified, and by the opening of heaven, and by the 
renting of the temple, and by the darkenes of the sunne in the time 
of his death, and by the rising up of the dead in the time of his 
resurrection, and by the virgine Marie\ mother of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, and by the unspeakable name of God, Tetragrainmaton. I 
conjure thee O Sibylia, O blessed and beautifuU virgine, by all the 
riall words aforesaid ; I conjure thee Sibylia by all their vertues to 
appeare in that circle before me visible, in the forme and shape of a 
beautifull woman in a bright and vesture white, adorned and garnished 
most faire, and to appeare to me quicklie without deceipt or tarrieng, 
and that thou faile not to fulfill my will & desire effectuallie. For I 
will choose thee to be my blessed virgine, & will have common 
copulation with thee. Therfore make hast & speed to come unto me, 
and to appeai-e as I said before : to whome be honour and glorie for 
ever and ever. Amen. 
The which doone and ended, if shee come not, repeate the conju- 
ration till they doo come : for doubtles they will come. And when 
she is appeared, take your censers, and incense hir with frankincense, 
then bind hir with the bond as followeth. ^ I doo conjure thee 
Sibylia, by God the Father, God the sonne, and God the Holie- 
ghost, three persons and one God, and by the blessed virgine 
Marie mother of our Lord Jesus Christ, and by all the whole and 
holie companie of heaven, and by the d