es, and by the most truest 
and speciallest name of your maister, that you doo come unto us, in 
faire forme of man or womankind, here visiblie, before this circle, 
and not terrible by anie manner of waies. This * circle being our 
tuition and protection, by the mercifull goodnes of our Lord and 
Saviour Jesus Christ, and that you doo make answer 
truelie, without craft or deceipt, unto all my 
demands and questions, by the vertue 
and power of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, Amen. 
an(\ Mel- 
chior, who 
followed 
the starre. 
wherin was 
y« image of 
a litle babe 
bearing a 
crosse : if 
Longa lege- 
da Colonitf 
lie not. 
[» jere. 
2nd ed.] 
300. 
tt Two words, 
and lomeas in 
engr.] 
* Which 
must be 
enviro- 
ned with 
a goodlie 
companie 
of crosses.

--- PAGE 448 ---
350 
15. Booke. 
The discoverie 
The xiiii. Chapter. 
* On sun- 
daies, festi- 
vall daies, 
and holie 
daies, none 
excepted. 
301. 
4ig. 
He dares 
doo no o- 
ther being 
so conjured 
I trowe. 
To bind the spirit Bealphares, and to lose him as;aine. 
low when he is appeared, bind him with these words 
which followe. ^| I conjure thee Bealphares, by God the 
father, by God the sonne, and by God the Holie-ghost, 
and by all the holie companie in heaven ; and by their 
vertues and powers I charge thee Bealphares^ that thou shalt not 
depart out of my sight, nor yet to alter thy bodilie shape, that thou 
art appeared in, nor anie power shalt thou have of our bodies or 
soules, earthlie or ghostlie, but to be obedient to me, and to the 
words of my conjuration, that be written in this booke. 1 conjure 
thee Bealphares, by all angels and archangels, thrones, dominations, 
principats, potestats, virtutes, cherubim and seraphim, and by their 
vertues and powers. I conjure and charge, bind and constreine thee 
Bealpliares, by all the riall words aforesaid, and by their vertues, 
that thou be obedient unto me, and to come and appeare visiblie 
unto me, and that in * all daies, houres, and minuts, whersoever I 
be, being called by the vertue of our Lord Jesu Christ, the which 
words are written in this booke. Looke readie thou be to appeare 
unto me, and to give me good counsell, how to come by treasures 
hidden in the earth, or in the water, and how to come to dig/nitie 
and knowledge of all things, that is to saie, of the magike art, and 
of grammar, dialectike, rhetorike, arythmetike, musike, geo/metrie, 
and of astronomic, and in all other things my will quicklie to be 
fulfilled : I charge thee upon paine of everlasting condemnation. 
Fiat, fiat, fiat. Amen. 
When he is thus bound, aske him what thinf( thou wilt, and he 
will tell thee, and give thee all things that thou wilt request of him, 
without anie sacrifice dooing to him, and without forsaking thy God, 
that is, thy maker. And when the spirit hath fulfilled thy will and 
intent, give him licence to depart as followeth. 
A licence for the spirit to depart. 
f»Aii this par. O unto the place predestinated and appointed for thee, where 
in much smaller ^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^^ appointed thee, untill I shall call thee 
againe. Be thou readie unto me and to my call, as often as I shall 
call thee, upon paine of everlasting damnation. And if thou wilt, 
thou maiest recite, two or three times, the last conjuration, untill thou

--- PAGE 449 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 14. 
doo come to this teanne, In throtio. If he will not depart, and then* ('^ 'hou] 
say In throno, that thou depart from this place, without hurt or dam- 
age of anie bodie, or of anie deed to be doone ; that all creatures 
may knowe, that our Lord is of all power, most mightiest, and that 
there is none other God but he, which is three, and one, living for 
ever and ever. And the malediction of God the father omnipotent, 
the sonne and the holie ghost, descend upon thee, and dwell alwaies 
with thee, except thou doo depart without damage of us, or of any 
creature, or anie other evill deed to be doone : & thou to go to the 
place predestinated. And by our Lord Jesus Christ I doo else send 
thee to the great pit of hell, except (I saie) that thou depart to the 
place, whereas thy Lord God hath appointed thee. And see thou 
be readie to. me and to my call, at all times and places, at mine owne 
will and pleasure, dale or night, without damage or hurt of me, or of 
anie creature ; upon paine of everlasting damnation : Fiat, fiat, fiat ; 
Amen, Amen, The peace of Jesus Christ bee betweene us and 
you ; in the name of the father, and of the sonne, and of the Holie- 
ghost : Amen. Per crucis hoc ^ signuin, &c. Saie In principio 
erat verbiim, (Sr= verbum erat apiid Deiim ; In the beginning was the 
word, and the word was with God, and God was the word : and so 
forward, as followeth in the first chapter of saint Johtis Gospell, 
staieng at these words, Full of grace and truth : to whom be all 
honour and glorie world without end, Amen. 
The fashion 
or forme of 
the conju- 
ring knife, 
with the 
names ther- 
on to bee 
graven or 
written.

--- PAGE 450 ---
ij. Booke. 
The discoverie 
A type or figure of the circle for the tnaister and his fellowes to 
sit in, shewing how and after what fashion it shotdd 
be 7nade. 
This is the circle for the maister to sit in, and his fellowe or fel- 
lowes, at the first calling, sit backe to backe, when he calleth 
the spirit ; and for the fairies make this circle with 
chalke on the ground, as is said before. This spirit 
Bealphares being once called and found, shall 
never have power to hurt thee. 
Call him in the houre 
of Tf or ? the » 
increasing. /

--- PAGE 451 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 15. 
353 
The XV. Chapter. 
The making of the holie water.* 
421. 
303. 
7ion sit san- 
ctus. 
[« These Rom.] 
[t Lat. hi small 
Ital.] 
\XORCISO\ te creaturam salts, per Deian vivum ^ per Absque ex- 
Deu7n ►{< verum per Deiini sanctum per Deum qui 
te per Elizmtm prophetatn in aqitani mitii jtissit, ut 
sanaretur sterilitas aguce, ut efficiaris sal exorcisatus in 
sahdem credentium ; ut sis omnibus te sumentibus sanitas animce 
corporis, effugiat atque discedat ab eo loco, qui asperstts ftterit 
omnis phatitasia dr' nequitia, vel versutia diabolicce fraudis, otnnisq; 
spiritus immundus, adjuratus per eum, qui venturus est judicare 
vivos mortuos, &^ sccculion per ignem, Atnen. Oremus : 
Imnmtsam cletnentiain tua/n, oinnipotens ceterne Deus, hionititer 
implorantus, lit hanc creaturam salis, quam in tisiim generis huinani 
tribuisti, bene^dicere 6-° sancti^ficare tua pietate digneris, tit sit 
omnibus sumentibus saltts mentis &^ corporis, ut quicquid ex eo tactttm 
fuerit, vel respersum, careat omni immundicia, omniq; iinpugnatione 
spiritualis nequitia, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum filium 
itium, qui tecum vivit dt' regnat in unitate spiritus sancti, Dei4S per 
omnia scecula scEculorum, Amen. 
To the water saie also as folio weth. 
PXorciso te creaturam aqucE in nomine ►{< patris ►{< Jesu Christi 
filii ejus Domini nosiri, &^ in virtute spiritus »^ sancti ►{« ut fias 
aqua exorcisata, ad effugandatn omnem potestatem inimici, ipsum 
inimicmn eradicare &' explantare valeas, cum angelis suis apostatis, 
per virtutem ejusdem Domini nostri Jesu Christi, qui venturus est 
judicare vivos mortuos, &^ saculum per ignem, Amen. Oremus : 
Detis, qui ad salutem humani generis maxima qticeque sacramenta 
in aquarum substantia condidisti, adesto propitius invocationibus 
nostris, elemento huic multimodis purificationibus praparato, vir- 
tutem tuce bene^dictionis infunde, tit creatura tua mysteriis tuis 
serviens, ad abigendos dcemones, morbosq; pellendos, divines gratice 
sumat effecttim, ut quicquid in dojntbtis, vel itt locis Jidelium hcec 
unda resperserit, careat omni immundicia, liberettir d. noxa, non illic 
resideat spiritus pestilens, non aura corrumpens, discedant omnes 
insidia latentis inimici, 6^ si quid est, quod aut incoltimitati habitan- 
tium tnvidet aut qttieti, aspersione hujus aquce effugiat, ut salubritas 
per invocationem sancti tui nominis expetita ab omnibus sit impug- 
Z Z

--- PAGE 452 ---
354 
15. BouUe. 
The discoverie 
nationibus defensa, per Dotninum nostrum Jesum Christum /ilium 
tJtuni, qui tecum vivit &^ regnat, in unitate spiritus sancti Deus per 
otnnia sacula saculorum, Amen. I 
Oraiio ad 
Deum ut sa- 
lt exorcisato 
vires addat. 
304. Then take the salt in thy hand, and saie putting it into the 
water, making in the maner of a crosse. 
Commixtio salis (Sr* aquce pariter fiat, in nomine patris, £r» filH, Ss^ 
spiritus sancti, Amen. Dominus vobiscutn, Et cum spiritu tuo, 
Oremus : ^ Deus invictcE virtutis author, insuperabilis imperii 
rex, ac semper magnificus triumphator, qui adversce dominationis 
vires reprimis, qui inimici rugientis scevitiam superas, qui hostiles 
nequitias potens expugnas ; te Domine trementes supplices depre- 
camur ac petimus, ut hanc creaturam salis Ss^ aqua aspicias, benignus 
illustres, pietatis tuce rare sancti fices, ubicunqj fuerit aspersa, per 
invocationem sancti tui nominis, omnis infestatio immundi spiritus 
422. abjiciatur, terrdrq; venenosi serpentis procul pellatur, 6^/ prcBsentia 
sancti spiritus nobis misericordiam tuam poscentibus ubiq; adesse 
dignetur, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum filium tuum, qui 
tecum vivit 6-» regnat in unitate spiritus sancti Deus per omnia 
sacula saculorum. Amen. 
Oratio, in 
qua dicenda, 
exorcista se- 
se sacri la- 
ticis asfer- 
gine debes 
perrorare. 
Then sprinkle upon anie thing, and saie as followeth. 
Asperges me Domine hyssopo, mundabor, lavabis me, supra 
nivem dealbabor. Miserere mei Deus, secundum magnam miseri- 
cordiam tuam, supra nivem dealbabor. Gloria patri, filio, &^ 
spiritui sancto : Sicut erat in principio, nunc, &^ semper, in 
sacula saculorum, Amen. Et supra nivem dealbabor, asperges 7ne, 
&'c. Ostende nobis Domine misericordiam tuam, salutare tuum da 
nobis ; exaudi nos Domine sancte, pater omnipotens, aterne Deus, &-= 
mittere dignare sanctum angelum tuum de calls, qui custodial, foveat, 
visitet, defendat omnes habitantes in hoc habitaailo, per Christutn 
Dominum nostrum. Amen, Amen. 
The xvi. Chapter. 
To make a spirit to appeare in a christall. 
DOO conjure thee N. by the father, and the sonne, and 
the Holie-ghost, the which is the beginning and the 
ending, the first and the last, and by the latter dale of 
judgement, that thou N. doo appeare, in this christall 
stone, or anie other instrument, at my pleasure, to mee and to my

--- PAGE 453 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. i6. 355 
felow, gentlie and beautifullie, in faire forme of a boy of twelve 
yeares of age, without hurt or damage of anie of our bodies or soules ; 
and certeinlie to informe and to shew me, without anie guile or craft, 
all that we doo desire or demand of thee to know, by the vertue of 
him, which shall come to judge the quicke and the dead, and the 
world by fier, Amen. 
Also I conjure and exorcise thee N. by the sacrament of the altar, Marke how 
and by the substance therof, by the wisedome of Christ, by the sea, thrsTs"vdth 
and by his vertue, by the earth, &; by all things that are above the popene. *<=. 
earth,/ and by their vertues, by the © and the D by fj It ^ and ? 305. 
and by their vertues, by the apostles, martyrs, confessors, and the 
virgins and widowes, and the chast, and by all saints of men or of 
women, and innocents, and by their vertues, by all the angels and 
archangels, thrones, dominations, principats, potestats, virtutes, 
cherubim, and seraphim, and by their vertues, & by the holie 
names of God, Tetragrammaton, El, Ousion, Agla, and by all the 
other holie names of God, and by their vertues, by the circumcision, 
passion, and resurrection of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the heavines 
of our ladie the virgine, and by the joy which she had/ when she 423. 
sawe hir sonne rise from death to life, that thou N. doo appeare in 
this christall stone, or in anie other instrument, at my pleasure, to 
me and to my felow, gentlie, and beautifullie, and visiblie, in faire 
forme of a child of twelve yeares of age, without hurt or damage of 
anie of our bodies or soules, and trulie to informe and shew unto me 
& to my felow, without fraud or guile, all things according to thine 
oth and promise to me, whatsoever I shall demand or desire of thee, 
without anie hinderance or tarrieng, and this conjuration be read of 
me three times, upon paine of eternall condemnation, to the last daie 
of judgement : Fiat fiat, fiat, Amen. 
And when he is appeared, bind him with the bond of the dead 
above written : then sale as followeth. ^ I charge thee N. by For hidden 
the father, to shew me true visions in this christall stone, treasure, 
if there be anie treasure hidden in such a place 
N. & wherin it lieth, and how manie 
foot from this peece of 
earth, east, west, 
north, or 
south.

--- PAGE 454 ---
356 
I <. Booke. 
The dis cove vie 
Th e xvii. 
Chapt er. 
Promises & 
oths inter- 
changea- 
blie made 
betweene 
the conju- 
ror & the 
spirit. 
Note the 
penaltie of 
breaking 
promise 
with the 
spirit. 
An experiment of the dead. 
llRST go and get of some person that shalbe put to death, 
a promise, and sweare an oth unto him, that if he will 
come to thee, after his death, his spirit to be with thee, 
and to remaine with thee all the daies of thy life, and 
will doo thee true service, as it is conteined in the oth and promise 
following. Then laie thy hand on thy booke, and sweare this oth 
unto him. I N. doo sweare and promise to thee N. to give for thee 
an almesse everie moneth, and also to praie for thee once in everie 
weeke, to sale the Lords praier for thee, and so to continue all the 
daies of my life, as God me helpe and holie doome, and by the 
contents of this booke. Amen. 
Then let him make his oth to thee as foUoweth, and let him sale 
after thee, laieng his hand upon the booke. I N. doo sweare this 
olh to thee N. by God the father omnipotent, by God the son Jesus 
Christ, and by his pretious bloud which hath redeemed all the world, 
by the which bloud I doo trust to be saved at the generall daie of 
judgment, and by the vertues therof, I N. doo sweare this oth to thee 
424. N. that my spirit that is within my bodie now,/ shall not ascend, 
nor descend, nor go to anie place of rest, but shall come to thee N. 
306. and be verie well pleased to remaine/ with thee N. all the daies of 
thy life, and so to be bound to thee N. and to appeare to thee N. in 
anie christall stone, glasse, or other mirror, and so to take it for my 
resting place. And that, so scone as my spirit is departed out of my 
bodie, streightwaie to be at your commandements, and that in and 
at all daies, nights, houres, and minutes, to be obedient unto thee 
N. being called of thee by the vertue of our Lord Jesu Christ, & out 
of hand to have common talke with thee at all times, and in all 
houres & minuts, to open and declare to thee N. the truth of all 
things present, past, and to come, and how to worke the magike art, 
and all other noble sciences, under the throne of God. If I doo not 
performe this oth and promise to thee N. but doo flie from anie part 
thereof, then to be condemned for ever and ever. Amen. 
Also I N. doo sweare to thee by God the Holie-ghost, and by the 
great wisedome that is in the divine Godhead, and by their vertues, 
and by all the holie angels, archangels, thrones, dominations, princi- 
pats, potestats, virtutes, cherubim and seraphim, and by all their 
vertues doo J A', sweare, and promise thee to be obedient as is

--- PAGE 455 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 17. 
357 
rehearsed. And heere, for a vvitnesse, doo I N. give thee A'^ my 
right hand, and doo phght thee my faith and troth, as God me helpe 
and holiedoome. And by the holie contents in this booke doo I A^. 
sweare, that my spirit shall be thy true servant, all the daies of thy 
life, as is before rehearsed. And here for a witnesse, that my spirit 
shall be obedient to thee N. and to those bonds of words that be 
written in this N. before the bonds of words shall be rehearsed 
thrise ; else to be damned for ever : and thereto saie all faithfull 
soules and spirits, Amen, Amen. 
Then let him sweare this oth *three times, and at everie time kisse 
the booke, and at everie time make marks to the bond. Then per- 
ceiving the time that he will depart, get awaie the people from you, 
and get or take your stone or glasse, or other thing in your hand, 
and saie the Pater Jioster, Ave, and Credo, and this praier as follow- 
eth. And in all the time of his departing, rehearse the bonds of 
words ; and in the end of everie bond, saie oftentimes ; Remember 
thine oth and promise. And bind him stronglie to thee, and to thy 
stone, and suffer him not to depart, rea/ding thy bond 24 times. And 
everie daie when you doo call him by your other bond, bind him 
stronglie by the first bond : by the space of 24 daies applie it, & 
thou shalt be made a man for ever. 
* Three 
times, in 
reverence 
(peradven- 
ture) of the 
Trinitie, P. 
F. S S. 
425- 
Now the Pater noster, Ave, and Credo must be said, and then 
the praier immediatlie follo%ving. 
OGodt of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, God of Tobias ; [t This par. in 
the which diddest deliver the three children from the hot ^'"^''^^ 'yp«l 
burning oven, Sidrac, Misac and Abdenago,X and Susanna from the ft ^ic] 
false crime, and Daniel from the lions power : even so O Lord omni- 
potent, I beseech thee, for thy great mercie sake, to helpe me in 
these my works, and to deliver me this spirit of N. that he may be 
a true subject to me N. all the daies of my life, and to remaine with 
me, and with this A^. all the daies of my life./ O glorious God, 307- 
Father, Sonne, and Holie-ghost, 1 beseech thee to help me at this 
time, and to give me power by thine holie name, merits and vertues, 
wherby I may conjure & constreine this spirit of N. that he may be 
obedient unto me, and may fulfill his oth and promise, at all times, 
by the power of all thine holines. This grant O Lord God of hosts, 
as thou art righteous and holy, and as thou art the word, and the 
word God, the beginning and the end, sitting in the thrones of thine 
everlasting kingdoms, & in the divinitie of thine everlasting Godhead, 
to whom be all honour and glorie, now and for ever and ever, Amen, 
Amen.

--- PAGE 456 ---
358 
15. Dooke. 
The discoverie 
Note the 
summe of 
this obli- 
gation or 
bond. 
[• i.e. me] 
* Scripture 
as well ap- 
plied of the 
conjuror, 
as that of 
satan in 
tempting 
Christ, 
Matth. 4, 6. 
The xviii. Chapter. 
A bond to bind him to thee, and to thy N. as followeth. 
N. conjure and constreine the spirit of N. by the Hving 
God, by the true God, and by the holie God, and by 
their vertues and powers I conjure and constreine the 
spirit of thee N. that thou shalt not ascend nor descend 
out of thy bodie, to no place of rest, but onelie to take thy resting 
place with *N. and with this N. all the daies of my life, according to 
thine oth and promise. I conjure and constreine the spirit of N. by 
these holie names of God Tetragrammaton ^ Adonay >^ Agla ^ 
Saday ^ Sabaoth ^ planabothe ^ panthon ►{< craton ►{< neupmaton 
Deus ^ homo omnipotens sempiternus ysus ►{< terra ►{< uni- 
genitus ^ salvator ^ via vita ^ manus ►J* fons ►{< origo ►{< filius 
►J* and by their vertues and powers I conjure and constreine the 
spirit of N. that thou shalt not rest nor remaine in the fier, nor in 
the water, in the aier, nor in anie privie place of the earth, but 
426. onelie with me N. and with this N. all the/ daies of my life. I 
charge the spirit of N. upon paine of everlasting condemnation, 
remember thine oth and promise. Also I conjure the spirit of N, 
and constreine thee by the excellent name of Jesus Christ, A and O, 
the first and the last ; for this holie name of Jesus is above all names, 
for *unto it all knees doo bow and obey, both of heavenlie things, 
earthlie things, and infernalles. Nor is there anie other name given 
to man, whereby we have anie salvation, but by the name of Jesus. 
Therefore by the name, and in the name of Jesus of Nazareth, and 
by his nativitie, resurrection and ascension, and by all that apper- 
teineth to his passion, and by their vertues and powers, I doo conjure 
and constreine the spirit of N. that thou shalt not take anie resting 
place in the nor in the D nor in Ij nor in % nor in $ nor in 9 
nor in § nor in anie of the twelve signes, nor in the concavitie of 
the clouds, nor in anie other privie place, to rest or staie in, but 
onelie with me A^. or with this N. all the daies of my life. If thou 
be not obedient unto me, according to thine oth and promise, I N. 
doo condemne the spirit of N. into the pit of hell for ever, Amen. 
I conjure and constreine the spirit of N. by the bloud of the inno- 
cent lambe Jesus Christ, the which was shed upon the crosse, for all 
308. those that/ doo obeie unto it, and beleeve in it, shall be saved and 
by the vertue thereof, and by all the aforesaid riall names and words 
of the living God by mee pronounced, I doo conjure and constreine 
the spirit of N. that thou be obedient unto me, according to thine

--- PAGE 457 ---
of iVitchcraft. 
Chap. i8. 
359 
oth and promise. If thou doo refuse to doo as is aforesaid, I N. by 
the holie trinitie, and by his vertue and power doo comdemne the 
spirit of N. into the place whereas there is no hope of remedie, but 
everlasting condemnation, and horror, and paine upon paine, dailie, 
horriblie, & lamentablie the paines there to be augmented, so 
thicke as the stars in the firmament, and as the gravell sand in the 
sea : except thou spirit of N. obeie me N. as is afore rehearsed ; 
else I N. doo condemne the spirit of N. into the pit of everlasting 
condemnation; Fiat, fiat, hxtv&n. Also I conjure thee, and constreine 
the spirit of N. by all angels, archangels, thrones, dominations, 
principals, potestats, virtutes, cherubim & seraphim, & by the foure 
evangelists, Matthew, Marke, Luke, and John, and by all things 
conteined in the old lawe and the new, and by their vertues, and by 
the twelve apo/stles, and by all patriarchs, prophets, martyrs, con- 
fessors, virgins, innocents, and by all the elect and chosen,* is, and 
shall be, which followeth the lambe of God ; and by their vertues 
and powers I conjure and constreine the spirit of N. stronglie, to 
have common talke with me, at all times, and in all daies, nights, 
houres, and minuts, and to talke in my mother toong plainelie, that 
I may heare it, and understand it, declaring the truth unto me of all 
things, according to thine oth and promise ; else to be condemned 
for ever ; Fiat, fiat, Amen. 
Also I conjure and constreine the spirit of N. by the * golden 
girdle, which girded the loines of our Lord Jesus Christ, so thou 
spirit of N. be thou bound, and cast into the pit of everlasting con- 
demnation, for thy great disobedience and unreverent regard that 
thou hast to the holie names and words of God almightie, by me 
pronounced : Fiat, Amen. 
Also I conjure, constreine, command, and bind the spirit of N. by 
the two edged sword, which John saw proceed out of the mouth of 
God almightie : except thou be obedient as is aforesaid, the sword 
cut thee in peeces, and condemne thee into the pit of everlasting 
paines, where the fier goeth not out, and where the worme dieth not ; 
Fiat, fiat, fiat. Amen. 
Also I conjure and constreine the spirit of N. by the throne of the 
Godhead, and by all the heavens under him, and by the celestiall 
citie new Jerusalem, and by the earth, by the sea, and by all things 
created and conteined therein, and by their vertues and powers, and 
by all the infernalles, and by their vertues and powers, and all things 
conteined therein, and by their vertues and powers, I conjure and 
constreine the spirit of A^. that now immediatlie thou be obedient 
unto me, at all times hereafter, and to those words of me pronounced, 
according to thine oth and promise : * else let the great cursse of 
Note what 
sore penal- 
ties the spi- 
rit is injoi- 
ned to suf- 
fer for dis- 
bedience. 
427. 
[* f which or 
that] 
* There is 
no mention 
made in the 
gospels that 
Christ was 
woorth a 
golden 
girdle. 
Bugs words. 
* Is it possi- 
ble to be 
greater

