elfe was of the inferior order 
of angels, and some that he was of the highest order : bicause it is 
written, Jji cherubim extentus &^ protegens posui te in Jiionte sancto 
Dei. And these saie further, that he was called the dragon, bicause 
of his excellent knowledge. Finallie, these great doctors conclude, 
that the divell himselfe was of the order of seraphim, which is the 
highest, because it is written, Quomodo enini manb oriebaris Lticifer ?\ 
They of this sect affirme, that Cacodcemones were they that rebelled 
against fove ; I meane they of Plato his sect, himselfe also holding 
the same opinion. Our schoolemen differ much in the cause of 
Lucifers fall. For some said it was for speaking these words, 
Po7iam sedem meain in aquiloiie, similis ero altissimo:X others saie, 
bicause he utterlie refused felicitie, and thought scorne therof; 
others saie, bicause he thought all his strength proceeded from him-

--- PAGE 521 ---
Divels and spirits. chap. lo. 423 
selfe, and not from God ; others saie that it was, bicause he attempted 
to doo that by himselfe, and his owne abilitie, which he should have 
obteined by the gift of another ;/ others saie, that his condemnation 362. 
grew hereupon, for that he challenged the place of the Messias ; 
others saie, bicause he detracted the time to adore the majestie of 
God, as other angels did ; others saie, bi/cause he utterlie refused it. 5'^4- 
Scottis and his disciples saie that it was, bicause he rebelliouslie claimed 
equall omnipotencie with God : with whom lightlie the Thotmsts 
never agree. Others saie it was for all these causes together, and 
manie more: so as hereupon (saith Laiirentiiis Ananias) grew a Laur. Anan. 
wonderfuU conflict betweene Michael and the good angels on the one ^dam. l'.'^'^"^' 
side, and Liccifer and his freends on the other : so as, after a long 
and doubtfull skirmish, Michael overthrew Lucifer, and turned him 
and his fellowes out of the doores. 
The tenth Chapter. 
Where the bat tell betweene Michael and Lucifer was fought, how 
long it continued, a7id of their power, how fondlie papists and 
infidels write of them, and how reverentlie Christians ought to 
thinke of them. 
OW where this battell was fought, and how long it con- 
tinued, there is as great contention among the schoole- 
men, as was betwixt Michael and Lucifer. The 
Thomists saie this battell was fought in the mpereiall* sic\ 
heaven, where the abode is of blessed spirits, and the place of 
pleasure and felicitie. Atigustine and manie others saie, that the 
battell was fought in the highest region of the aier ; others saie, in 
the firmament ; others in paradise. The Thomists also saie it con- 
tinued but one instant or pricke of time ; for they tarried but two 
instants in all, even from their creation to their expulsion. The 
Scotists saie, that betweene their production and their fall, there were 
just foure instants. Nevertheles, the greatest number of schoolemen 
afSrme, that they continued onelie three instants : bicause it stood 
with Gods justice, to give them three warnings ; so as at the third 
warning Lucifer fell downe like led (for so are the words) to the 
bottome of hell ; the rest were left in the aire, to tempt man. The 
Sadduces were as grosse the other waie : for they said, that by angels 
was ment nothing else, but the motion that God dooth inspire in men, 
or the/ tokens of his power. He that readeth Eiisebius shall see joj. 
Instans, viz. 
puncium 
temp. 7iempe 
uidividu- 
um Nunc.

--- PAGE 522 ---
424 
Chap. 10. 
A discourse of 
Euseb. in ec- 
clesi. histor. 
10000000. 
Johannes 
Cassianus 
in confessi- 
one theolog. 
trifart. 
363. 
J. Cal. lib. in- 
stil. I. caf<. 14. 
sect. 8. 
Mich. And. 
thes. 107. loi. 
Idem thes. 
103. 108. 
506. 
Luk. 15, 7. 
Luk. 16, 23. 
J. Cal. lib. in- 
stil. I. cap. 14. 
manie more absurd opinions and asseverations of angels: as how 
manie thousand yeares they serve as angels, before they come to the 
promotion of archangels, &c. 
Monsietcr Bodin, M. Mai. and manie other papists gather upon the 
seventh of Daniel, that there are just ten millians of angels in heaven. 
Manie sale that angels are not by nature, but by office. Finallie, it 
were infinite to shew the absurd and curious collections hereabout. I 
for my part thinke with Calvine, that angels are creatures of God ; 
though Moses spake nothing of their creation, who onelie applied him- 
selfe to the capacitie of the common people, reciting nothing but 
things seene. And I sale further with him, that they are heavenlie 
spirits, whose ministration and service God useth : and in that respect 
are called angels. I sale yet againe with him,/ that it is verie certeine, 
that they have no shape at all ; for they are spirits, who never have 
anie : and finallie, I saie with him, that the scriptures, for the 
capacitie of our wit, dooth not in vaine paint out angels unto us with 
wings ; bicause we should conceive, that they are readie swiftlie to 
succour us. And certeinlie all the sounder divines doo conceive and 
give out, that both the names and also the number of angels are set 
downe in the scripture by the Holie-ghost, in termes to make us 
understand the greatnesse and the manner of their messages ; which 
(I saie) are either expounded by the number of angels, or signified by 
their names. 
Furthermore, the schoole doctors afifirme, that foure of the superior 
orders of angels never take anie forme or shape of bodies, neither 
are sent of anie arrand at anie time. As for archangels, they are 
sent onelie about great and secret matters ; and angels are com- 
mon hacknies about evere trifle ; and that these can take what shape 
or bodie they list : marie they never take the forme of women or 
children. Item they saie that angels take most terrible shapes : for 
Gabriel appeared to Marie, when he saluted hir. Facie rutilanfe, 
veste corttscante, ingressti mirabili, aspectu terribili, : that is, 
with a bright countenance, shining attire, wonderfull gesture, and a 
dredful vissage, &c. But of apparitions I have spoken somewhat 
before, and will saie more hearafter. It hath beene long, and con- 
tinueth yet a constant opinion, not one/lie among the papists ; but 
among others also, that everie man hath assigned him, at the time of 
his nativitie, a good angell and a bad. For the which there is no 
reason in nature, nor authoritie in scripture. For not one angell, but 
all the angels are said to rejoise more of one convert, than of ninetie 
and nine just. Neither did one onelie angell conveie Lazarus into 
Abrahams bosome. And therefore I conclude with Calvine, that he 
which referreth to one angell, the care that GOD hath to everie one

--- PAGE 523 ---
Divels and spirits. Chap. II. 4-2 ' 
of US, dooth himselfe great wrong : as may appeare by so manie fierie 
chariots shewed by Elizmis to his servant. But touching this mysterie 2. Reg. 16. i 
of angels, let us reverentlie thinke of them, and not curiouslie search 
into the nature of them, considering the vilenes of our condition, in 
respect of the glorie of their creation. And as for the foresaid fond 
imaginations and fables of Lucifer, they are such as are not 
onelie ridiculous, but also accomptable among those impious curiosi- 
ties, and vaine questions, which Paule speaketh of : neither have 
they anie tittle or letter in the scripture for the maintenance of their 
grosse opinions in this behalfe. 
The eleventh Chapter. 
Whether they became divels which being angeis kept not their 
vocation, in Jicde and Peter j of the fond opinions of the Rabbins 
touching spirits and bugs, with a confutation thereof. 
jE doo read in fude, and find it confirmed in Peter, that jud. vers. 6. 
the angels kept not their first estate, but left their owne ^- ^ 4- 
habitation, and sinned, and (as fob saith) committed 
foUie : and that God therefore did cast/ them downe into 364. 
hell, reserving them in everlasting chaines under darkenes, unto the 
judgement of the great daie. But manie divines sale, that they find 
not anie where, that God made divels of them, or that they became 
the princes of the world, or else of the aire ; but rather prisoners. ^ ^ ^ 
Howbeit, divers doctors affirme, that this Zz/cz/^r, notwithstanding par.' 2. qua'' 1 
his fall, hath/ greater power than any of the angels in heaven : marrie ^' ^- 3 
they say that there be certeine other divels of the inferiour sort of Mai. male/. 
angels, which were then thrust out for smaller faults, and therefore ^qita'st. i"^^ ' 
are tormented with little paines, besides eternal damnation : and these 
(sale they) can doo little hurt. They affirme also, that they onelie use 
certeine jugling knacks, delighting thereby to make men laugh, as Mich. And. 
they travell by the high waies : but other (sale they) are much more -^J'"' ^«««- 
churlish. For proofe heereof they alledge the eighth of Matthew, b^c. 
where he would none otherwise be satisfied but by exchange, from 
the annoieng of one man, to the destruction of a whole heard of 
swine. The Rabbines, and namelie Rabbi Abraham, writing upon the ^""'f''' 
second of Genesis, doo say, that God made the fairies, bugs, Inctibus, in Gen. 2. 
Robin good fellow, and other familiar or domesticall spirits & divels 
on the fridaie : and being prevented with the evening of the sabboth, 
finished them not, but left them unperfect ; and therefore, that ever

--- PAGE 524 ---
426 Chap 12. A discourse of 
since they use to flie the holinesse of the sabboth, seeking darke 
holes in mountaines and woods, wherein they hide themselves till the 
end of the sabboth, and then come abroad to trouble and molest 
men. 
But as these opinions are ridiculous and fondlie collected ; so if we 
have onelie I'espect to the bare word, or rather to the letter, where 
spirits or divels are spoken of in the scriptures, we shall run into as 
The grosse dangerous absurdities as these are. For some are so carnallie minded, 
maniTat" tliat a Spirit is no sooner spoken of, but immediatlie they thinke of a 
the hearing blacke man with cloven feet, a paire of homes, a taile, clawes, and 
of a spirit . ' . 
named. cies as broad as a bason, &c. But surelie the divell were not so wise 
in his generation, as I take him to be, if he would terrific men with 
such uglie shapes, though he could doo it at his pleasure. For by 
that meanes men should have good occasion & oportunitie to flie 
from him, & to run to God for succour ; as the maner is of all them 
that are terrified, though perchance they thought not upon God of 
long time before. But in truth we never have so much cause to be 
afraid of the divell, as when he flatteringlie insinuateth himselfe into 
our harts, to satisfie, please, and serve our humors, entising us to 
prosecute our owne appetits and pleasures, without anie of these 
externall terrors. I would weete of these men, where they doo find 
^08. in the scrip/tures, that some divels be spirituall, and some corporall ; 
or how these earthie or waterie divels enter into the mind of man. 
Aug. 171 ser. 4. Atis:ustine saith, and diverse others affirme, that sathan or the divell 
Greg. 29. ' ' 
Slip. Job. while we feed, allureth us with gluttonie : he thrusteth lust into our 
s^'r/atlvit''^' generation ; and sloth into our exercise ; into our conversation, envie ; 
into our traffike, avarice ; into our correction, wrath ; into our govern- 
ment, pride : he putteth into our harts evill cogitations ; into our 
mouthes, lies, &c. When we wake, he mooveth us to evill works ; 
when we sleepe, to evill and filthie dreames ; he provoketh the merrie 
to loosenesse, and the sad to despaire./ 
365. 
The twelfe Chapter. 
Ephe. 6, II, 
That the divels assaults are spirituall aiid not temporall, and how 
grosselie some tmderstand those parts of the scripture. 
PON that, which hitherto hath beene said, you see that 
the assaults of sathan are spirituall, and not temporall : in 
which respect Patile wisheth us not to provide a corselet 
of Steele to defend us from his clawes ; but biddeth us 
put on the whole armour of God, that we may be able to stand against

--- PAGE 525 ---
Divels and spirits. ' chap. 13. 427 
the invasions of the divell. For we wrestle not against flesh and 
bloud ; but against principalities, powers, and spirituall wickednesse. 
And therefore he adviseth us to be sober and watch : for the divell 2. Tim. 2,8,9. 
goeth about like a roring lion, seeking whome he may devoure. He 
meaneth not with carnall teeth : for it followeth thus, Whome resist idem ibid. 
ye stedfastlie in faith. And againe he saith. That which is spirituall 
onelie discerneth spirituall things : for no carnall man can discerne the i. Cor. 2. 14. 
things of the spirit. Why then should we thinke that a divell, which 
is a spirit, can be knowne, or made tame and familiar unto a naturall 
man ; or contrarie to nature, can be by a witch made corporall, being 
by God ordeined to a spirituall proportion ? 
The cause of this grosse conceipt is, that we hearken more dili- 
gentlie to old wives, and rather give credit to their fables, than/ 
to the word of God ; imagining by the tales they tell us, that the divell 5og. 
is such a bulbegger, as I have before described. For whatsoever is 
proposed in scripture to us by parable, or spoken figurativelie or 
significativelie, or framed to our grosse capacities, &c : is by them so 
considered and expounded, as though the bare letter, or rather their 
grosse imaginations thereupon were to be preferred before the true 
sense and meaning of the word. For I dare sale, that when these 
blockheads read Jotlians parable in the ninth of Judges to the men 
of Sichem; to wit, that the trees went out to annoint a king over judg. 9. 7, 8, 
them, saieng to the olive tree, Reigne thou over us : who answered '°' "'"2> 
and said. Should I leave my fatnesse, &c 
They imagine that the 
woodden trees walked, & spake with a mans voice : or else, that 
some spirit entred into the trees, and answered as is imagined they 
did in the idols and oracles of Apollo, and such like ; who indeed 
have eies, and see not ; eares and heare not ; mouthes, and speake 
not, &c./ 
The xiii. Chapter. 
366. 
The equivocation of this word spirit, how diverslie it is taken in 
the scriptures, where (by the waie ) is taught that the scripture 
is not alwaies literallie to be i7iterpreted, nor yet allegoricallie 
to be understood. 
(JCH as search with the spirit of wisedome and under- 
standing, shall find, that spirits, as well good as bad, are 
in the scriptures diverslie taken : yea they shall well 
perceive, that the divell is no horned beast. For some- 
times in the scriptures, spirits and divels are taken for infirmities of 
Exod. 31, I

--- PAGE 526 ---
428 Chap. 13. A discourse of 
bActs. 8, 19. the bodie;'^ sometimes for the vices of the mind; sometimes also 
Gal. 3. , 
c John 6. for the gifts of either of them. Sometimes a man is called a divell, 
d'r.'cor.^3. Judas in the sixt of John, and Peter in the xvi. of Matthew. 
^^]; 3' ^ Sometimes a spirit is put for the Gospell ; sometimes for the mind 
1 . Cor. 2. . ^ 
2. Cor. 7. or soule of man ; sometmies for the will of man, his mind and 
i.'corts' counsell ; sometimes '^for teachers and prophets; sometimes s for 
^''.^j^'' 
510. zeale to/wards God ; sometimes'' for joie in the Holie-ghost, &c. 
f I. John. '4. And to interpret unto us the nature and signification of spirits, we 
hEphe^'s.' find these words written in the scripture; to wit. The spirit of the 
isii. 11,2. Lord shall rest upon him ; The spirit of counsell and strength ; The 
Z,ach. 12, 10. spirit of wisedome and understanding ; The spirit of knowledge and 
the feare of the Lord. Againe, I will powre out my spirit upon the 
house of David, : The spirit of grace and compassion. Againe, 
Ye have not received the spirit of bondage, but the spirit of adoption, 
f 
"cTor'i'^'s ^"^^ therefore Paiile saith, To one is given, by the spirit, the word of 
9. 10- wisedome ; to another, the word of knowledge by the same spirit ; 
to another, the gift of healing ; to another, the gift of faith by the 
I. Co. 12, II. same spirit ; to another, the gift of prophesie ; to another, the opera- 
tion of great works ; to another, the discerning of spirits; to another, 
the diversitie of toongs; to another, the interpretation of toongs: and 
all these things worketh one and the selfesame spirit. Thus farre the 
isai. 19, 14. words of Paitk. And finallie, Esaie saith, that the Lord mingled 
among them the spirit of error. And in another place. The Lord 
Isaie. 29. hath covered you with a spirit of slumber. 
As for the spirits of divination spoken of in the scripture, they are 
I. Sam. 28. such as was in the woman of Endor, the Philippian woman, the 
Hest. 16. wench of Westwell, and the holie maid of Kent ; who were indued 
with spirits or gifts of divination, whereby they could make shift to 
gaine monie, and abuse the people by slights and craftie inventions. 
But these are possessed of borrowed spirits, as it is written in the 
Sap. 15,15, booke of Wisedome ; and spirits of meere cousenage and deceipt, as 
I have sufficientlie prooved elsewhere. I denie not therefore that 
there are spirits and divels, of such substance as it hath pleased GOD 
to create them. But in what place soever it be found or read in the 
scriptures, a spirit or divell is to be understood spirituallie, and is 
neither a corporall nor a visible thing. Where it is written, that God 
judg. 9, 23. sent an evill spirit betweene Abimelech, and the men of Sichem, we 
3G7. are to/ understand, that he sent the spirit of hatred, and not a bul- 
Num. 5, 14. bcgger. Also where it is said ; If the spirit of gelosie come upon 
him : it is as much to sale as ; If he be mooved with a gelous mind : 
and not that a corporall divell assaulteth him. It is said in the Gos- 
Luke. 13, II. pell ; There was a woman, which had a spirit of infirmitie 18. yeeres,/ 
J//, who was bowed tog*ither, &c : whome Christ, by laieng his hand upon

--- PAGE 527 ---
Dive Is and spirits. chap. m. 429 
hir, delivered of hir disease. Wherby it is to be scene, that although 
it be said, that sathan had bound hir, &c: yet that it was a sicknes or 
disease of bodie that troubled hir ; for Christs owne words expound 
it. Neither is there any word of witchcraft mentioned, which some 
saie was the cause thereof. 
There were seven divels cast out oi Marie Magdalen. Which is Mark. 16,9. 
not so grosselie understood by the learned, as that there were in hir 
just seven corporall divels, such as I described before elsewhere ; but 
that by the number of seven divels, a great multitude, and an uncer- 
teine number of vices is signified : which figure is usuall in divers 
places of the scripture. And this interpretation is more agreeable Levit.'ze. 
with Gods word, than the papisticall paraphrase, which is ; that ly\ 
Christ, under the name of the seven divels, recounteth the seven 
deadlie sinnes onelie. Others allow neither of these expositions ; 
bicause they suppose that the efficacie of Christs miracle should this 
waie be confounded : as though it were not as difficult a matter, with 
a touch to make a good Christian of a vicious person ; as with a word 
to cure the ague, or any other disease of a sicke bodie. I thinke not Matth. 8, 16. 
but any of both these cures may be wrought by meanes, in processe 
of time, without miracle ; the one by the preacher, the other by the 
physician. But I saie that Christs worke in both was apparentlie 
miraculous : for with power and authoritie, even with a touch of his 
finger, and a word of his mouth, he made the blind to see, the halt to Luk. 4, 36. 
go, the lepers cleane, the deafe to heare, the dead to rise againe, and ''' 
the poore to receive the Gospell, out of whom (I saie) he cast divels, 
and miraculouslie conformed them to become good Christians, which 
before were dissolute livers; to whome he said, Go your waies and JoimS, u. 
sinne no more./ 
The xiiii. Chapter. 
T/iaf it pleased God to 7iia7iifest the power of his sonne and not of 
witches by miracles. 
ESUS CHRIST, to manifest his divine power, rebuked Luke. 8, 14. 
the winds, and they ceased ; and the waves of water, and 
it was calme : which if neither our divines nor physicians 
can doo, much lesse our conjurors, and least of all our old 
witches can bring anie such thing to passe. But it pleased God to 
manifest the power of Christ Jesus by such miraculous & extra- 
ordinarie meanes, providing and as it were preparing diseases, that 
none otherwise could be cured, that his sonnes glbrie, and his peoples

--- PAGE 528 ---
430 ciKip. 14. A discoiLTse of 
Luk' ^' ^ ^^^^^ might the more plainehe appeere ; as namehe, leprosie, lunacie, 
' 
and blindnesse : as it is apparent in the Gospell, where it is said, that 
John. 9. the man was not stricken with blindnesse for his owne sinnes, nor for 
368. any offense of his ancestors ;/ but that he was made bhnd, to the 
intent the works of God should be shewed upon him by the hands of 
Jesus Christ. But witches with their charmes can cure (as witch- 
mongers affirme) all these diseases mentioned in the scripture, and 
manie other more ; as the gowt, the toothach, &c : which we find not 
that ever Christ cured, 
^at. 4. >7. As touching those that are said in the Gospell to be possessed of 
spirits, it seemeth in manie places that it is indifferent, or all one, to 
saie ; He is possessed with a divell ; or, He is lunatike or phrentike: 
which disease in these dales is said to proceed of melancholie. But 
if everie one that now is lunatike, be possessed with a reall divell ; 
then might it be thought, that divels are to be thrust out of men by 
medicines. But who saith in these times with the woman of Ca9taan ; 
My daughter is vexed with a divell, except it be presupposed, that she 
meant hir daughter was troubled with some disease } Indeed we 
saie, and saie truelie, to the wicked. The divell is in him : but we 
meane not thereby, that a reall divell is gotten into his guts. And if 
j/j. it were so, I marvell/ in what shape this reall divell, that possesseth 
them, remaineth. Entreth he into the bodie in one shape, and into 
the mind in another? If they grant him to be spirituall and invisible, 
I agree with them. 
Some are of opinion, that the said woman of Chanaaji ment indeed 
that hir daughter was troubled with some disease ; bicause it is 
Matt. 15, 28. written in sted of that the divell was cast out, that hir daughter was 
made whole, even the selfesame houre. According to that which is 
Matt. 12, 22. said in the 12. of Matthew ; There was brought unto Christ one pos- 
sessed of a divell, which was both blind and dumbe, and he healed 
him : so as, he that was blind and dumbe both spake and sawe. 
But it was the man, and not the divell, that was healed, 
and made to speake and see. Whereby (I saie) it is 
gathered, that such as were diseased, as well 
as they that were lunatike, were 
said sometimes to be 
possessed of 
divels.

