eft hand to the bought thereof: and 343- 
putting your owne peece a little before the other (the end or rather 
middle whereof you must hide betwixt your forefinger and thombe) 
making the eie or bought, which shall be seene, of your owne patterne, 
let some stander by cut the same a/sunder, and it will be surelie 242. 
thought that the other lace is cut ; which with words and froting, 
&c : you shall seeme to renew & make whole againe. This, if it be 
well handled, will seeme miraculous. 
O O

--- PAGE 380 ---
282 
IV Booke. 
TJie discoverie 
A common 
juggling 
knacke of 
fiat couse- 
nage plaied 
among the 
simple, &c. 
Hoio to pull laces inmivierable out of your jnouth, of what colour 
or len_^th you list, and never aide thing scene to be therein. 
AS for pulling laces out of the mouth, it is somewhat a stale jest, 
whereby jugglers gaine monie among maides, selling lace by 
the yard, putting into their mouths one round bottome as fast as 
they pull out an other, and at the just end of everie yard they tie a 
knot, so as the same resteth upon their teeth : then cut they off 
the same, and so the beholders are double and treble deceived, see- 
ing as much lace as will be conteined in a hat, and the same of what 
colour you list to name, to be drawne by so even yards out of his mouth, 
and yet the juggler to talke as though there were nothing at all in his 
mouth. 
Juggling a 
kind of 
witchcraft. 
The inven- 
tion of 
Clarvis. 
This knack 
is sooner 
learned by 
demonstra- 
tive means, 
than taught 
bywords of 
instruction. 
The xxxiii. Chapter. 
How to make a booke, wherein yoti shall shew everie leafe thereiji 
to be white, blacke, blew, red, yellow, greene, ^'c. 
I HERE are a thousand jugglings, which I am loth to spend 
time to describe, whereof some be common, and some 
rare, and yet nothing else but deceipt, cousenage, or con- 
federacie : whereby you may plainelie see the art to be a 
kind of witchcraft. I will end therfore with one devise, which is not 
common, but was speciallie used by Clarvis, whome though I never 
saw to exercise the feat, yet am I sure I conceive aright of that inven- 
tion. He had (they/ sale) a booke, whereof he would make you thinke 
first, that everie leafe was cleane white paper: then by vertue of words 
he would shew you everie leafe to be painted with birds, then with 
beasts, then with serpents, then with angels, &c : the devise thereof 
is this. *\ Make a booke seven inches long, and five inches broad, or 
according to that proportion : and let there be xlix, leaves ; to wit, 
seven times seven conteined therin, so as you may cut upon the edge 
of each leafe six notches, each notch in depth halfe a quarter of an inch, 
and one inch distant. Paint everie foureteenth and fifteenth page 
(which is the end of everie sixt leafe, & the beginning of everie 
seventh) with like colour, or one kind of picture. Cut off with a paire 
of sheares everie notch of the first leafe, leaving onlie one inch of 
paper in the uppermost place uncut, which will remaine almost halfe a 
quarter of an inch higher than anie part of that leafe. Leave an other 
like inch in the second place of the second leafe, clipping away one 
inch of paper in the highest place immediatlie above it, and all the 
notches below the same, and so orderlie to the third, fourth, &c : so 
as there shall rest upon each leafe one onlie inch of paper above the 
rest. One high uncut inch of paper must answer to the first, directlie

--- PAGE 381 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 33. 283 
in everie seventh leafe of the booke : so as when you have cut the 
first seven leaves, in such sort as I first described,/ you are to begin in 243. 
the selfe same order at the eight leafe, descending in such wise in the 
cutting of seven other leaves, and so againe at the fifteenth, to xxi, 
&c : untill you have passed through everie leafe, all the thicknes of 
your booke. 
Now you shall understand, that after the first seven leaves, everie 
seventh leafe in the booke is to be painted, saving one seven leaves, 
which must remaine white. Howbeit you must observe, that at each 
Bumleafe or high inch of paper, seven leaves distant, opposite one 
directlie and hneallie against the other, through the thicknesse of the 
booke, the same page with the page precedent so to be painted with 
the like colour or picture ; and so must you passe through the booke 
with seven severall sorts of colours or pictures : so as, when you shall 
rest your thombe upon anie of those Bumleaves, or high inches, and 
open the booke, you shall see in each page one colour or picture This will 
through out the booke ; in an other rowe, an other colour, &c. To to the be- 
make that matter more plaine unto you, let this be the description 'solders, 
hereof Hold the booke/ with your left hand, and (betwixt your fore- j^j. 
finger and thombe of your right hand) slip over the booke in what 
place you list, and your thombe will alwaies rest at the seventh leafe ; 
to wit, at the Bumleafe or high inch of paper from whence when your 
booke is streined, it will fall or slip to the next, &c. Which when you 
hold fast, & open the booke, the beholders seeing each leafe to have 
one colour or picture with so manie varieties, all passing continuallie & 
directlie thrugh the whole booke, will suppose that with words you 
can discolour the leaves at your pleasure. But because perhaps you whersuch 
will hardlie conceive herof by this description, you shall (if you be gotten^^ 
disposed) see or buie for a small value the like booke, at the shop of 
W. Brome in Powles churchyard, for your further instruction. •[[ There 
are certeine feats of activitie, which beautifie this art exceedinglie : 
howbeit even in these, some are true, and some are counterfet ; to 
wit, some done by practise, and some by confederacie. ^ There are 
likewise divers feats arythmeticall & geometricall : for them read 
Gemma Phrysius, and Record, &^c. which being exercised by jugglers 
ad credit to their art. ^ There are also (besides them which I have 
set downe in this title of Hartummi) sundrie strange experiments 
reported hy Plinie, Albert, Joh. Bap. Port. J\ eap. and Thoiuas Lupton, 
wherof some are true, and some false : which being knowne to Jannes 
and Jambres, or else to our jugglers, their occupation is the more 
magnified, and they thereby more reverenced. ^ Here is place to See more 
discover the particular knaveries of casting of lots, and drawing of {hTn.'book 
cuts (as they terme it) whereby manie cousenages are wrought : so as ofthisdis- 
Tj 11 i-i - 1 1-11 Ti- 1 coverie, m 
1 dare not teach the sundne devises thereof, least the ungodlie make a the title

--- PAGE 382 ---
284 13. Booke. TJie discoverie 
Nahas, cap. practise of it in the commonwealth, where manie things are decided by 
lo^pag. 197, those meanes, which being honestUe meant may be lawfullie used. 
But I have said alreadie somewhat hereof in generall, and there- 
fore also the rather have suppressed the particularities, which (in 
truth) are meere juggling knackes : whereof I could discover a great 
number./ 
* The natu- 
ral! cause 
why a hen 
thrust tho- 
rough the 
held with a 
bodkin 
dooth live 
notwith- 
standing. 
It must be 
cleanelie 
conveied 
in any case. 
346. 244. The xxxiiii. Chapter. 
Desperate or dafigerous juggling knacks, wherein the sifnple are 
made to thitike, that a seelie juggler with words can hurt and 
helpe, kill and revive anie creature at his pleasure : and Jirst 
to kill anie kind of pullen, and to give it life agaijte. 
AKE a hen, a chicke, or a capon, and thrust a nail or a fine 
sharpe pointed knife through the midst of the head 
thereof, the edge towards the bill, so as it may seeme 
impossible for hir to scape death : then use words, and 
pulling out the knife, laie otes before hir, &c : and she will eate and 
live, being nothing at all greeved or hurt with the wound ; bicause 
the* braine lieth so far behind in the head as it is not touched, though 
you thrust your knife betweene the combe and it : and after you have 
doone this, you may convert your speach and actions to the greevous 
wounding and present recovering of your owne selfe. 
To eate a knife, and to fetch it out of anie other place. 
TAke a knife, and conteine the same within your two hands, 
so as no part be seene thereof but a little of the point, which 
you must so bite at the first, as noise may be made therewith. 
Then seeme to put a great part thereof into your mouth, and let- 
ting your hand slip downe, there will appeare to have beene more 
in your mouth than is possible to be conteined therein. Then send 
for drinke, or use some other delaie, untill you have let the said 
knife slip into your lap, holding both your fists close together as 
before, and then raise them so from the edge of the table where 
you sit (for from thence the knife may most privilie slip downe 
into your lap) and in steed of biting the knife, knable a little upon 
your naile, and then seeme to thrust the knife into your mouth, 
opening the hand next unto it, and thrust up the other, so as it 
may appeare to the standers by, that you have delivered your/ 
347. hands therof, and thrust it into your mouth : then call for drinke, 
after countenance made of pricking and danger, &c. Lastlie, put 
your hand into your lap, and taking that knife in your hand, you 
may seeme to bring it out from behind you, or from whence you

--- PAGE 383 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 34. 285 
list. ^ But if you have another hke knife and a confederate, you 
may doo twentie notable woonders hereby : as to send a stander 
by into some garden or orchard, describing to him some tree or 
herbe, under which it sticketh ; or else some strangers sheath or 
pocket, &c. 
T 
To thrust a bodkin into your head without htcrt. 
Ake a bodkin so made, as the haft being hollowe, the blade The maner 
, _ .... 1,11 • & meanes 
thereof may sup theremto as soone as you hold the pomt up- ofthisacti- 
ward : and set the same to your forehead, and seeme to thrust it into °"- 
your head, and so (with a little sponge in your hand) you may wring 
out bloud or wine, making the be/holders thinke the bloud or the 245. 
wine (whereof you may saie you have drunke verie much) runneth 
out of your forehead. Then, after countenance of paine and greefe, 
pull awaie your hand suddenlie, holding the point downeward ; 
and it will fall so out, as it will seeme never to have beene thrust 
into the haft : but immediatlie thrust that bodkin into your lap or 
pocket, and pull out an other plaine bodkin like the same, saving in 
that conceipt. 
To thrust a bodkin through your toojig, and a knife through your 
arme : a pittifull sight, without hurt or danger. 
MAke a bodkin, the blade therof being sundred in the middle, so ^ forme or 
as the one part be not neere to the other almost by three p?."'=/'"5i°^ 
. •' this bodkin 
quarters of an inch, each part being kept a sunder with one small and knife 
bought or crooked piece of iron, of the fashion described hereafter in descdbed^T 
place convenient. Then thrust your toong betwixt the foresaid space ; 
* J *=> A over a few 
to wit, into the bought left it the bodkin blade, thrustmg the said leaves for- 
bought behind your teeth, and biting the same : and then shall it 
seeme to sticke so fast in and through your toong, as that one can 
hardlie pull it out. IT Also the verie like may be doone with a knife 
so made, and put upon your arme : and the wound will appeare the 
more terrible, if a little bloud be powred/ thereupon. 348. 
To thrust a peece of lead into ojte eie, and to drive it about {with 
a sticke) betweene the skiji and flesh of the forehead, untill 
it be brought to the other eie, and there thrust out. 
Put a peece of lead into one of the nether lids of your eie, as big 
as a tag of a point, but not so long (which you may doo without 
danger) and with a little juggling sticke (one end therof being hollow) 
seeme to thrust the like peece of lead under the other eie lid ; but 
conveie the same in deed into the hollownes of the sticke, the stopple 
or peg whereof may be privilie kept in your hand untill this feate be

--- PAGE 384 ---
286 
1 3. Booke 
The discoverie 
doone. Then seeme to drive the said peece of lead, with the hollow 
end of the said sticke, from the same eie: and so with the end of the 
said sticke, being brought along upon your forhead to the other eie, 
you maie thrust out the peece of lead, which before you had put 
thereinto ; to the admiration of the beholders. \ Some eat the lead, 
and then shoove it out at the eie : and some put it into both, but the 
first is best. 
To cut halfe yoicr nose asunder, and to heale it againe presentlie 
wiihojit anie salve. 
TAke a knife having a round hollow gap in the middle, and laie it 
upon your nose, and so shall you seeme to have cut your nose 
halfe asunder. Provided alwaies, that in all these you have an other 
like knife without a gap, to be shewed upon the pulling out of the 
same, and words of inchantment to speake, bloud also to beeraie the 
wound, and nimble conveiance./ 
246. To put a ring through your cheeke. 
THere is an other old knacke, which seemeth dangerous to the 
cheeke. For the accomplishing whereof you must have two 
rings, of like colour and quantitie ; the one filed asunder, so as you 
may thrust it upon your cheeke ; the other must be whole, and con- 
veied upon a sticke, holding your hand thereupon in the middle of the 
sticke, delivering each end of the same sticke to be holden fast by a 
stander by. Then conveieng the same cleanlie into your hand, or (for 
34g. lacke of good conveiance) into your lap or/ pocket, pull awaie your 
hand from the sticke : and in pulling it awaie, whirle about the ring, 
and so will it be thought that you have put thereon the ring which 
was in your cheeke. 
To cut off ones head, and to laie it in a platter, Ss^c : which the 
jugglers call the decollation of John Baptist. 
TO shew a most notable execution by this art, you must cause a 
boord, a cloth, and a platter to be purposelie made, and in each 
of them holes fit for a boies necke. The boord must be made of two 
planks, the longer and broader the better : there must be left within 
halfe a yard of the end of each planke halfe a hole ; so as both planks 
being thrust togither, there may remaine two holes, like to the holes 
in a paire of stocks : there must be made likewise a hole in the table- 
cloth or carpet. A platter also must be set directlie over or upon one 
of them, having a hole in the midle thereof, of the like quantitie, and 
also a peece cut out of the same, so big as his necke, through which 
his head may be conveied into the middest of the platter : and then 
sitting or kneeling under the boord, let the head onlie rem.aine upon 
This is easi- 
lie doone, 
howbeit 
being clen- 
lie handled 
it will de- 
ceive the 
sight of the 
beholders. 
This was 
doone by 
one Kings- 
field of 
London, at 
a Bartholo- 
inewtide, 
An. 1582. 
in the sight 
of diverse 
that came 
to view this 
spectacle.

--- PAGE 385 ---
of Witchcraft. ciiap. 34. 287 
the boord in the same. Then (to make the sight more dredfull) put 
a little brimstone into a chafing dish of coles, setting it before the 
head of the boie, who must gaspe two or three times, so as the smoke 
enter a little into his nostrils and mouth (which is not unholsome) 
and the head presentlie will appeare starke dead ; if the boie set his 
countenance accordinglie : and if a little bloud be sprinkled on his 
face, the sight will be the stranger. 
This is commonlie practised with a boie instructed for that purpose, 
who being familiar and conversant with the companie, may be 
knowne as well by his face, as by his apparell. In the other end of 
the table, where the like hole is made, an other boie of the bignesse 
of the knowne boie must be placed, having upon him his usuall 
apparell : he must leane or lie upon the boord, and must put his head 
under the boord through the said hole, so as his bodie shall seeme to 
lie on the one end of the boord, and his head shall lie in a platter on 
the other end. ^ There are other things which might be performed ^^^^e^a^t"^ 
in this action, the more to astonish the beholders, which because they o"^ to asto- 
, 1 ■ ■ T • , 1 ■ , 1- n 1 1 nish the be- 
efier long descriptions, 1 omit : as to put about his necke a little dough holders, 
kneded with bul/locks bloud, which being cold will appeare like dead 350- 
flesh ; & being pricked with a sharpe round hollow quill, will bleed, 
and seeme verie strange, &c. \ Manie rules are to be observed 
herein, as to/ have the table cloth so long and wide as it may almost 247. 
touch the ground. ^ Not to suffer the companie to staie too long in 
the place, &c. 
To thrust a dagger or bodkin into your guts verie strajtgelie, and 
to recover immediatlie. 
AN other miracle may be shewed touching counterfet executions ; 
namelie, that with a bodkin or a dagger you shall seeme to kill 
your selfe, or at the least make an unrecoverable wound in your bellie : 
as (in truth) not long since a juggler caused himself to be killed at a 
taverne in cheapside, from whence he presentlie went into Powles Of a jug- 
churchyard and died. Which misfortune fell upon him through his iJfi^ngln 
owne foUie, as being then drunken, and having forgotten his plate, Jhe feats of 
which he should have had for his defense. The devise is this. \ You his life, 
must prepare a paste boord, to be made according to the fashion of 
your bellie and brest : the same must by a painter be coloured cun- 
ninglie, not onelie like to your flesh, but with pappes, navill, haire, 
&c : so as the same (being handsomelie trussed unto you) may shew 
to be your naturall bellie. Then next to your true bellie you may put 
a linnen cloth, and thereupon a double plate (which the juggler that 
killed himselfe forgot, or wilfullie omitted) over and upon the which 
you may place the false bellie. Provided alwaies, that betwixt the 
plate & the false bellie you place a gut or bladder of bloud, which

--- PAGE 386 ---
288 u-Booke. The discoverie 
But herein 
see you be 
circumspect. 
bloud must be of a calfe or of a sheepe ; but in no wise of an oxe or a 
cow, for that will be too thicke. Then thrust, or cause to be thrust 
into your brest a round bodkin, or the point of a dagger, so far as it 
may pearse through your gut or bladder : which being pulled out 
againe, the said bloud will spin or spirt out a good distance from you, 
especiallie if you straine your bodie to swell, and thrust therewith 
against the plate. You must ever remember to use (with words, 
countenance, and gesture) such a grace, as may give a grace to the 
action, and moove admiration in the beholders./ 
35I' 
A forme or 
patterne of 
this bridle 
you shall 
see descii- 
bed if you 
turne over 
a few leaues. 
To drawe a cord through yotir Jiose, mo^ith or hand, so sejisiblie 
as is woonderftd to see. 
THere is an other juggling knacke, which they call the bridle, 
being made of two elder sticks, through the hollownes therof 
is placed a cord, the same being put on the nose like a paire of tongs 
or pinsars ; and the cord, which goeth round about the same, being 
drawne to and fro, the beholders will thinke the cord to go through 
your nose verie dangerouslie. The knots at the end of the cord, 
which doo stale the same from being drawne out of the sticke, 
may not be put out at the verie top (for that must be stopped up) 
but halfe an inch beneath each end : and so I sale, when it is 
pulled, it will seeme to passe through the nose ; and then may you 
take a knife, and seeme to cut the cord asunder, and pull the bridle 
from your nose./ 
248. The conclusion, wherin the reader is referred to certeine patterns 
of instruments wherewith diverse feats heere specified 
are to be executed. 
HErein I might wade infinitelie, but I hope it sufficeth, that I 
have delivered unto you the principles, and also the principall 
feats belonging to this art of juggling ; so as any man conceiving 
throughlie hereof may not onlie doo all these things, but also may 
devise other as strange, & varie everie of these devises into other 
formes as he can best conceive. And so long as the power of almightie 
God is not transposed to the juggler, nor offense ministred by his 
uncomlie speach and behaviour, but the action performed in pastime, 
to the delight of the beholders, so as alwaies the juggler confesse in 
the end that these are no supernaturall actions, but devises of men, 
and nimble conveiances, let all such curious conceipted men as cannot 
affoord their neighbors anie comfort or commoditie, but such as

--- PAGE 387 ---
of Witchcraft. chap.34. 289 
pleaseth their melancholike dispositions say what they list, for this 
will not onelie be found among: indifferent actions, but such as Among 
. , . . , what acti- 
greatlie advance the power and glone of God, discovering their pride ons jug- 
and falshood that take upon them to worke miracles, and to be the counted, 
mightie power of God, as Jannes and Jambres and also Simon Magus 
did. 
If anie man doubt of these things, as whether they be not as/ strange 332. 
to behold as I have reported, or thinke with Bodin that these matters 
are performed by familiars or divels ; let him go into S. Martins, and 
inquire for one John Cautares (a French man by birth, in con- ^ matchies 
versation an honest man) and he will shew as much and as strange feiiowe for 
' ° legierde- 
actions as these, who getteth not his living hereby, but laboureth maine. 
for the same with the sweat of his browes, and neverthelesse hath the 
best hand and conveiance (I thinke) of anie man that liveth this daie. 
Neither doo I speake (as they sale) without booke herein. For if 
time, place, and occasion serve, I can shew so much herein, as I am 
sure Bodin, Spinalis, and Vairiis, would sweare I were a witch, and 
had a familiar divell at commandement. But truelie my studie and 
travell herein hath onelie beene emploied to the end I might proove 
them fooles, and find out the fraud of them that make them fooles, as 
whereby they may become wiser, and God may have that which to 
him belongeth. 
And bicause the maner of these juggling conveiances are not easilie Touching 
conceived by discourse of words ; I have caused to be set downe fernes of 
diverse formes of instruments used in this art : which may serve for duerse jug- 
gang in- 
patternes to them that would throughlie see the secrets thereof, and struments. 
make them for their owne private practises, to trie the event of such 
devises, as in this tract of legierdemaine are shewed. Where note, 
that you shall find everie instrument that is most necessarilie 
occupied in the working of these strange feats, to beare the just and 
true number of the page, where the use thereof is in ample words 
declared. 
Now will I proceed with another cousening point of witchcraft, apt 
for the place, necessarie for the time, and in mine opinion meet to be 
discovered, or at the least to be defaced among deceitfull arts. And 
bicause manie are abused heereby to their utter undooing, for 
that it hath had passage under the protection of learn- 
ing, wherby they pretend to accomplish their 
works, it hath gone freelie with- 
out generall controlment 
through all ages, 
nations & 
people.// 
P P

--- PAGE 388 ---
To be instructed in the right use of the said headstones, read 
page 337, and 338. As for the bridle, read page 351. 
[These four pages of engravings are unpaged in the first and second editions. 
The references are to the first edition pagings. ]

--- PAGE 389 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 34. 291 
To thrust a bodkin into your head, and through your 
toong, St'c. 
A 
The hethei- 
most is the 
bodkin w* 
the bowt : y° 
midlemost 
is the bod- 
kin with the 
holow haft : 
the further 
most is the 
plaine bod- 
kin serving 
for shew. 
TO be instructed and taught in the right use and readie practise of 
these bodkins, read pag. 347.

--- PAGE 390 ---
i3. Uookc. 
The discoverie 
To thrust a knife through your arine, and to cut half e your nose 
asunder, Gfc. 
The mid- 
dle most 
knife is to 
serve for 
shew; the 
other two 
be the 
knives of 
device. 
•yO be readie in the use and perfect in the practise of these knives 
-i- here portraied, see page 347. and 348.

--- PAGE 391 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chip. 34. 
WHat order is to be observed for the practising heereof with great 
admiration, read page 349, 350.

