e scriptures. 
Item sometimes it is taken in good part ; as the magicians that came 
to worship and offer to Christ: and also where Daniell is said to be 
an inchanter, yea a principall inchanter : which title being given him 
in divers places of that storie, he never seemeth to refuse or dislike ; 
log. 
I. Praestigi- 
atores 
Pharaonis. 
2. Mecasa- 
pha. 
3. Kasam. 
Onen. 
Ob. 
Idoni. 
4. Habar. 
[or Mashis] 
Note. 
no. 
1. Sa. 15, 23. 
2. Re. 9, 22. 83. 
Gal. 3, I. 
Matth. 2, I, 
Daniel. 4.

--- PAGE 186 ---
88 
5. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Dan. 2, 8. 
Actes. 19. 
Gen. 4, 18. 
Exod. 7, 
13, &c. 
Acts 13. 
Exod. 23, 
&c. 
Acts. 13. 
Acts. 19. 
Canticles 
of Salo- 
mon, cap. 4. 
verse, 9. 
Deut. 18, 2 
Jerem. 27. 
Acts. 8. 
but rather intreateth for the pardon and qualification of the rigor 
towards other inchanters, which were meere couseners indeed : as 
appeareth in the second chapter of Daniell, where you may see that 
the king espied their fetches. 
Sometimes such are called conjurors, as being but roges, and lewd 
people, would use the name of Jesus to worke miracles, whereby, 
though they being faithlesse could worke nothing ; yet is their practise 
condemned by the name of conjuration. Sometimes jugglers are 
called witches. Sometimes also they are called sorcerers, that 
impugne the gospell of Christ, and seduce others with violent per- 
suasions. Sometimes a murtherer with poison is called a witch. 
Sometimes they are so termed by the verie signification of their 
names ; as Eli»ias, which signifieth a sorcerer. Sometimes bicause 
they studie curious and vaine arts. Sometimes it is taken for woond- 
ing or greeving of the hart. Yea the verie word Magits, which is 
Latine for a magician, is translated a witch ; and yet it was hertofore 
alwaies taken in the good part. And at this dale it is indifferent to 
saie in the English toong ; She is a witch ; or, She is a wise woman. 
Sometimes observers of dreames, sometimes soothsaiers, sometimes 
the observers of the flieng of foules, of the meeting of todes, the fall- 
ing of salt, &c : are called witches. Sometimes he or she is called a 
witch, that take upon them either for gaine or glorie, to doo miracles ; 
and yet can doo nothing. Sometimes they are called witches in 
common speech, that are old, lame, curst, or melancholike, as a nick- 
name. But as for our old women, that are said to hurt children with 
their eies, or lambs with their lookes, or that pull downe 
the moone out of heaven, or make so foolish a bargaine, 
or doo such homage to the divell ; you shall 
not read in the bible of any such 
witches, or of any such actions 
imputed to them.//

--- PAGE 187 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. i. 89 
\ The sixt Booke. m. 84. 
The first Chapter. 
The exposition of this Hebriie word Ckasaph, wherein is answered 
the objection conteined in Exodus 22. to wit : Thou shalt not 
suffer a witch to live, and of Simon Magtis. Acts. 8. 
HASAPH, being an Hebrue word, is Latined Venefcium, 
and is in English, poisoning, or witchcraft ; if you will 
so have it. The Hebrue sentence written in Exodzes, 22. 
is by the 70. interpretors translated thus into Greeke, 
^apfiaKovi ovK cVf^etocreTe, which in Latineis, Venefcos isive) veneficas 
non retinebitis in vita, in English, You shall not suffer anie poisoners, 
or (as it is translated) witches to live. The which sentence fosephiis Joseph, in 
an Hebrue borne, and a man of great estimation, learnmg and fame, antiquitat. 
interpreteth in this wise ; Let none of the children of Israel have any 
poison that is deadlie, or prepared to anie hurtfuU use. If anie be 
apprehended with such stuffe, let him be put to death, and suffer that 
which he ment to doo to them, for whom he prepared it. The Rabbins 
exposition agree heerewithall. Lex Cornelia differeth not from this 
sense, to wit, that he must suffer death, which either maketh, selleth, 
or hath anie poison, to the intent to kill anie man. This word is found 
in these places following : Exodus. 22, 18. Deut. 18, 10. 2. Sain. 
9, 22. Dan. 2, 2. 2. Chr. 33, 6. Esay. 47, 9, 12. Malach, 3, 5. Jerem. 
27, 9. Mich. 5, 2. Nah. 3, 4. bis. Howbeit, in all our English / trans- 112. 
lations, Chasaph is translated, witchcraft. 
And bicause I will avoid prolixitie and contention both at once, I 
will admit that Veneficce were such witches, as with their poisons did 
much hurt among the children of Israeli ; and I will not denie that 
there remaine such untill this dale, bewitching men, and making 
them beleeve, that by vertue of words, and certeine ceremonies, they 
bring to passe such mischeefes, and intoxications, as they indeed 
accomplish by poisons. And this abuse in cousenage of people, 
together with the taking of Gods name in vaine, in manie places of 
the scripture is reprooved, especiallie by the name of witchcraft, even 
where no poisons are. According to the sense which S. Paule useth 
to the Galathians in these words, where he sheweth plainelie, that 
the true signification of witchcraft is cousenage ; O ye foolish Gala- Gal. 3, i. 
N

--- PAGE 188 ---
90 6. Booke. The discoverie 
thians (saith he) who hath bewitched you ? to wit, cousened or abused 
you, making you beleeve a thing which is neither so nor so. Whereby 
he meaneth not to aske of them, who have with charmes, &c : or with 
poisons deprived them of their heahh, hfe, cattell, or children, &c: 
but who hath abused or cousened them, to make them beleeve hes. 
Job. 15, 12. This phrase is also used by Job. 15. But that we may be throughlie 
resolved of the true meaning of this phrase used by Paule, Gal. 3. 
let us examine the description of a notable witch called Simon 
Acts. 8, 9, Magus, made by S. Ltike ; There was (saith he) in the citie of 
86. Samaria., a certeine man called Simoft, j which used witchcraft, and 
bewitched the people of Samaria, saieng that he himself was some 
great man. I demand, in what other thing here do we see anie 
witchcraft, than that he abused the people, making them beleeve he 
could worke miracles, whereas in truth he could doo no such thing ; 
as manifestlie may appeare in the 13. and 19. verses of the same 
chapter : where he wondered at the miracles wrought by the apostles, 
and would have purchased with monie the power of the Holy-ghost 
to worke wonders. 
Acts. 8, M. It will be said, the people had reason to beleeve him, bicause it is 
written, that he of long time had bewitched them with sorceries. 
But let the bewitched Galathians be a warning both to the bewitched 
Samaritans, and to all other that are cousened or bewitched through 
false doctrine, or legierdemaine ; least while they attend to such 
113. fables and lies, they be brought into ignorance, / and so in time be led 
with them awaie from God. And finallie, let us all abandon such 
witches and couseners, as with Simo7i Magus set themselves in the 
place of God, boasting that they can doo miracles, expound dreames, 
foretell things to come, raise the dead, &c : which are the workes of 
I. Reg. 8, 39. the Holy-ghost, who onlie searcheth the heart and reines, and onelie 
^2^2% 22''' worketh great wonders, which are now staled and accomplished in 
Acts. 1, 24. Christ, in whome who so stedfastlie beleeveth shall not need to be 
Rom'. 8, 27. by such meanes resolved or confirmed in his doctrine and gospell. 
Lu*6^'i7 & ^"^^ unfaithfull, they shall have none other miracle shewed 
II. & 9- unto them, but the signe of Jo7ias the prophet. 
& 6. & And therefore I sale, whatsoever they be that with Simon Magus 
Luk*^ II 29 ^ t^^^ upon them to worke such wonders, by soothsaieng, sorcerie, or 
Ecci. 34, 5. witchcraft, are but liers, deceivers, and couseners, according to Sy racks 
saieng ; Sorcerie, witchcraft, soothsaieng, and dreames, are but 
Ecci. 34, 8. vanitie, and the lawe shalbe fulfilled without such lies. God com- 
manded the people, that they should not regard them that wrought 
Levi. 19, 31. with spirits, nor soothsaiers : for the estimation that was attributed 
unto them, offended God.

--- PAGE 189 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 2. 91 
The second Chapter. 
The place of Deuteronomie expounded, wheritt are recited all kind 
of witches ; also their opinions confuted, which hold that they can 
worke such miracles as are imputed tutto them. 
I 
HE greatest and most common objection is, that if there 
were not some, which could worke such miraculous or 
supernaturall feats, by themselves, or by their divels, it Deut. iS. 
should not have beene said ; Let none be found among 
you, that maketh his sonne or his daughter to go through the tier, or 
that useth witchcraft, or is a regarder of times, or a marker of the 
flieng of fowles, or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that counselleth with 
spirits, or a soothsaier, or that asketh counsell of the dead, or (as 
some translate it) / that raiseth the dead. But as there is no one place 114. 
in the scripture that saith they can worke miracles, so it shalbe easie 
to proove, that these were all couseners, everie one abusing the people 
in his/severall kind ; and are accurssed of God. Not that they can 86. 
doo all such things indeed, as there is expressed ; but for that they 
take upon them to be the mightie power of God, and to doo that 
which is the onelie worke of him, seducing the people, and blas- 
pheming the name of God, who will not give his glorie to anie Esay. 42 
creature, being himselfe the king of glorie and omnipotencie. ^ 
First I aske, what miracle was wrought by their passing through 
the fier t Trulie it cannot be prooved that anie effect followed ; but 
that the people were bewitched, to suppose their sinnes to be purged 
thereby ; as the Spaniards thinke of scourging and whipping them- 
selves. So as Gods power was imputed to that action, and so for- 
bidden as an idolatrous sorcerie. What woonders worketh the 
regarder of times 1 What other divell dealeth he withall, than with 
the spirit of superstition ? Doth he not deceive himselfe and others, 
and therefore is worthilie condemned for a witch ? What spirit useth 
he, which marketh the flieng of fowles ? Nevertheles, he is here con- 
demned as a practiser of witchcraft ; bicause he couseneth the people, 
and taketh upon him to be a prophet ; impiouslie referring Gods 
certeine ordinances to the flittering fethers and uncerteine waies of a 
bird. The like effects produceth sorcerie, charming, consultation with 
spirits, soothsaieng, and consulting with the dead : in everie of the 
which Gods power is obscured, his glorie defaced, and his commande- 
ment infringed. 
And to proove that these soothsaiers and witches are but lieng 
mates and couseners ; note these words pronounced by God himselfe,

--- PAGE 190 ---
!
92 
6. Boukc. 
The discoverie 
Deut. i8, 14 
115- 
Sap. 3, I. 
LuJc. 16, 23. 
Job. 14, 12. 
Psal. 88, 10. 
Deut. 18, II. 
Luk. 16. 29. 
31- 
Luk. 16, 22. 
Joh. 5, 21. 
Ose. 6. 
Acts. 17. 25. 
28. 
Tim. 6, 13. 
87. 
26. qiicE. 7. non, 
obser. fact. 
1398. act. 17. 
A ugiist, de 
spirit. <S7» ayii- 
ma. cap, 28. 
even in the selfe same place to the children of Israeli : Although the 
Gentiles suffered themselves to be abused, so as they gave eare to 
these sorcerers, &c : he would not suffer them so, but would raise 
them a prophet, who should speake the truth. As if he should saie ; 
The other are but lieng and cousening mates, deceitful! and under- 
mining merchants, whose abuses I will make knowne to my people. 
And that everie one maie be resolved herein, let the last sentence of 
this precept be well weighed ; to wit. Let none be found among you, 
that asketh counsell of (or rai/seth the dead.) 
First you know the soules of the righteous are in the hands of God, 
and resting with Lazarics in Abrahams bosome, doo sleepe in Jesus 
Christ. And from that sleepe, man shall not be raised, till the heavens 
be no more : according to this of David ; Wilt thou shew woonders 
among the dead .'' Nay, the Lord saith, The living shall not be 
taught by the dead, but by the living. As for the unrighteous, they 
are in hell, where is no redemption ; neither is there anie passage 
from heaven to earth, but by God and his angels. As touching the 
resurrection and restauration of the bodie, read JoJm. 5. and you 
shall manifestlie see, that it is the onelie worke of the father, who hath 
given the power therof to the sonne, and to none other, &c. Domimis 
percutit, &^ ipse medetiir : Ego occidam, &' ego vivefaciam. And in 
manie other places it is written, that God giveth life and beeing to all. 
Although Plato,, with his maister Socrates, the cheefe pillers of these 
vanities, say, that one Pa7nphiliis was called up out of hel, who when 
he cam among the people, told manie incredible tales concerning 
infernall actions. But herein I take up the proverbe;/ Ainicus 
Plato,, amicus Socrates,, sed major amica Veritas. 
So as this last precept, or last part thereof, extending to that which 
neither can be done by witch nor divell, maie well expound the other 
parts and points therof. For it is not ment hereby, that they can 
doo such things indeed ; but that they make men beleeve they doo 
them, and thereby cousen the people, and take upon them the office 
of God, and therewithall also blaspheme his holie name, and take it 
in vaine ; as by the words of charmes and conjurations doo appeare, 
which you shall see, if you looke into these words, Habar and Idoni. 
In like manner I saie you may see, that by the prohibition of divi- 
nations by augurie, and of soothsaiengs, &c, who are witches, and can 
indeed doo nothing but lie and cousen the people, the lawe of God 
condemneth them not, for that they can worke miracles, but bicause 
they saie they can doo that which perteineth to God, and for cou- 
senage, &c. Concerning other points of witchcraft conteined therein, 
and bicause some cannot otherwise be satisfied, I will alledge under 
one sentence, the decretals, the mind of S. Aic^iistitie, the councell 
I

--- PAGE 191 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chafi. 3. 
Aureliaii, and the determination of/ Parts, to wit : Who so observeth, 116. 
or giveth heed unto soothsaiengs, divinations, witchcraft, &c, or doth 
give credit to anie such, he renounceth christianitie, and shalbe 
counted a pagane, & an enemie to God ; yea and he erreth both in 
faith and philosophie. And the reason is therewithal! expressed in 
the canon, to wit ; Bicause hereby is attributed to a creature, that 
which perteineth to God onelie and alone. So as, under this one 
sentence (Thou shalt not suffer a poisoner or a witch to live) is for- 
bidden both murther and witchcraft ; the murther consisting in 
poison ; the witchcraft in cousenage or blasphemie. 
The third Chapter. 
Thai wovien have used poisoning in all ages more than men, and of 
the incotivenience of poisoning. 
S women in all ages have beene counted most apt to 
conceive witchcraft, and the divels speciall instruments 
therin, and the onelie or cheefe practisers therof : so 
 also it appeareth, that they have been the first inventers, 
and the greatest practisers of poisoning, and more naturallie addicted 
and given thereunto than men : according to the saieng of Qicintilian ; 
Latrocinittm facilitis in viro, veneficizim iit fcemina credam. From 
whom Plinie differeth nothing in opinion, when he saith, Scientiam Piin. 
faminaripn in veneficiis prcEvalere. To be short, Augustine, Livie, 
Valerius, Diodorus, and manie other agree, that women were the 
first inventers and practisers of the art of poisoning. As for the rest 
of their cunning, in what estimation it was had, may appeare by these 
verses of Horace, wherein he doth not onelie declare the vanitie of 
witchcraft, but also expoundeth the other words, wherewithall we are 
now in hand. 
Sojunia, terrores magicos, miracula, sagas, 
Nocturnos lemures, portentdqj Thessala rides : // 
These dreames and terrors magicall, iiy 
these miracles and witches, 
Night-walkijtg sprites, or Thessal bugs, 
esteeme them not twoo rushes. 
Here Horace (you see) contemneth as ridiculous, all our witches 
cunning: marrie herein he comprehendeth not their poisoning art, 
which hereby he onelie seemed to thinke hurtfull. Pythagoras and 
Democritus give us the names of a great manie magicall hearbs and 
stones, whereof now, both the vertue, and the things themselves also 
are unknowne: as Marmaritin, whereby spirits might be raised:

--- PAGE 192 ---
94 
6. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Ovid, mela- 
morph. lib. i. 
Englished by 
Abraham uS 
Fleming. 
[Misp. 86] 89. 
Aencid. 4. 
lib 4. 
A?chimedon, which would make one bewraie in his sleepe, all the 
secrets in his heart: Adincantida, Calicia, Mevais, Chirocineta, &^c: 
which had all their severall vertues, or rather poisons. But all these 
now are worne out of knowledge: marrie in their steed we have hogs 
turd and chervill, as the onelie thing whereby our witches worke 
miracles. 
Trulie this poisoning art called Veiieficiufii, of all others is most 
abhominable ; as whereby murthers maie be committed, where no 
suspicion maie be gathered, nor anie resistance can be made; the 
strong cannot avoid the weake, the wise cannot prevent the fooHsh, 
the godlie cannot be preserved from the hands of the wicked; children 
maie hereby kill their parents, the servant the maister, the wife hir 
husband, so privilie, so inevitablie, and so incurablie, that of all other 
it hath beene thought the most odious kind of murther; according to 
the saieng of Ovid : 
 noil hospes ab hospite iutus, 
Non socer d genero,fratriim qiidqj gratia raracst : 
Imminet exitio vir conjugis, ilia inariti, 
Ltirida terribiles miscent aconita novercce, 
Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in amios. \ 
 The travelling ghest opprest 
Dooth stand in danger of his host., 
the host eke of his ghest : { 
The father of his so?me in lawe, ' 
yea rare is seette to rest 
Twixt brethren love and ainitie, 
and kindtiesse void of strife; 
The husband seekes the goodiuifes death., 
and his againe the wife. 
Ungentle stepdames grizlie poi- 
son temper and doo give : 
The Sonne too soone dooth aske how long 
his father is to live. 
The monke that poisoned king John, was a right Veneficus ; to 
wit, both a witch and a murtherer: for he killed the king with poison, 
and / persuaded the people with lies, that he had doone a good and 
a meritorious act: and doubtlesse, manie were so bewitched, as they 
thought he did verie well therein. Antonius Sabellicus writeth of a 
horrible poisoning murther, committed by women at Rome, where 
were executed (after due conviction) 170. women at one time ; 
besides 20. women of that consort, who were poisoned with that poison 
which they had prepared for others. /

--- PAGE 193 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 4 
The fourth Chapter. ng. 
Of divers poisonincr practises, otherwise called veneficia^ cofnmitted 
in Italie, Genua, Millen, Wittenberge, also how they were dis- 
covered and executed. 
NOTHER practise, not unlike to that mentioned in the Veneficas 
former chapter, was doone in Cassalis at Salassia in 
Italie, Anno 1536. where 40. Veneficcc or witches being of 
one confederacie, renewed a plague which was then 
almost ceased, besmeering with an ointment and a pouder, the posts 
and doores of mens houses ; so as thereby whole families were 
poisoned: and of that stuffe they had prepared above 40. crocks for 
that purpose. Herewithall they conveied inheritances as it pleased 
them, till at length they killed the brother and onelie sonne of one 
Nectis (as lightlie none died in the house but the maisters and their 
children) which was much noted; and therewithall that one Aiidro- 
gina haunted the houses, speciallie of them that died: and she being ■ 
suspected, apprehended, and examined, confessed the fact, conspiracie, 
and circumstance, as hath beene shewed. The like villanie was 
afterwards practised at Genua, and execution was doone upon the Veneficee 
offenders. At Millen there was another like attempt that tooke none ^ M'iUen 
effect. This art consisteth as well in poisoning of cattell as of men: 
and that which is doone by poisons unto cattell, towards their destruc- 
tion, is as commonlie attributed to witches charms as the other. And 
I doubt not, but some that would be thought cunning in incantations, 
and to doo miracles, have experience in this behalf For it is written 
by divers authors, that if wolves doong be hidden in the mangers, 
racks, or else in the hedges about the pastures, where cattell go 
(through the antipathie of the nature of the woolfe and other cattell) 
all the beasts that savour the same doo not onlie forbeare to eate, but 
run about as though they were mad, or (as they say) bewitched. 
But Wierus telleth a notable storie of a Venejicus, or destroier/ of 120. 
cattell, which I thought meete heere to repeat. There was (saith he) Of ^ ^"-"ht 
in the dukedome of Wittingberge, not farre from Tubing, a butcher, veneficaii 
anno 1564. that bargained with the towne for all their hides which which [? witch.] 
were of sterven cattell, called in these parts Morts. He with poison 
privilie killed in great numbers, their bullocks, sheepe, swine, &c: and 
by his bargaine of the hides and tallowe he grew infinitlie rich. 
And at last being suspected, was examined, confessed the matter and 
maner thereof, and was put to death with hot tongs, wherewith his 
flesh was pulled from his bones. We for / our parts would have killed 90. 
five poore women, before we would suspect one rich butcher.

--- PAGE 194 ---
6. Booke. The discoverie 
The fift Chapter. 
A great objection answered concerning this kind of witchcraft 
called Veneficium. 
T is objected, that if Veneficium were comprehended 
under the title of manslaughter, it had beene a vaine 
repetition, and a disordered course undertaken by Moses, 
to set foorth a lawe against Vetieficas severallie. But it 
might suffice to answer any reasonable christian, that such was the 
pleasure of the Holie-ghost, to institute a particular article herof, as 
of a thing more odious, wicked and dangerous, than any other kind of 
murther. But he that shall read the lawe of Moses, or the testament 
of Christ himselfe, shall find this kind of repetition and reiteration of 
the law most common. For as it is written Exod. 22, 21. Thou shalt 
not greeve nor afflict a stranger, for thou wast a stranger in the land of 
Levit. 19, 33. Aegypt: so are the same words found repeated in Levit. 19, 33. Polling 
and shaving of heads and beards is forbidden in Deiit. 27. which was 
before prohibited in 22. It is written in Exodus the 20. Thou shalt 
not steale : and it is repeated in Leviticus 19. and in Deut. 5. Mur- 
ther is generallie forbidden in Exod. 20. and likewise in 22. and 
repeated in Num. 35. But the aptest example is, that magicke is 
121. forbidden in three severall places, to wit, once/ in Levit. 19. and twise 
in Levit. 20. For the which a man might as well cavill with the 
Holie-ghost as for the other. 
The sixt Chapter. 
Ln what kind of cotifections that witchcraft, which is called Veni- 
ficium, consisteth: of love ctips, and the same confuted by poets. 
S touching this kind of witchcraft, the principall part 
thereof consisteth in certeine confections prepared by 
lewd people to procure love; which indeed are meere 
poisons, bereaving some of the benefit of the braine, and 
so of the sense and understanding of the mind. And from some it 
taketh awaie life, & that is more common than the other. These be 
called Philtra, or Pocula amatoria, or Venenosa poctila, or Hippo- 
manes; which bad and blind physicians rather practise, than witches 
or conjurers, &c. But of what value these babies are, towards the 
end why they are provided, may appeere by the opinions of poets 
themselves, from whence was derived the estimation of that stuffe.

