ns, read pag. 347.

--- PAGE 390 ---
i3. Uookc. 
The discoverie 
To thrust a knife through your arine, and to cut half e your nose 
asunder, Gfc. 
The mid- 
dle most 
knife is to 
serve for 
shew; the 
other two 
be the 
knives of 
device. 
•yO be readie in the use and perfect in the practise of these knives 
-i- here portraied, see page 347. and 348.

--- PAGE 391 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chip. 34. 
WHat order is to be observed for the practising heereof with great 
admiration, read page 349, 350.

--- PAGE 392 ---
294 
14 Booke. 
The discoverie 
353- 249. 
The xiiii. Booke. 
Alcumy- 
strie a craft, 
not an art. 
G. Chaucer 
in the Cha- 
nons mans 
prolog. 
[See note.] 
354- 
[• confections] 
[* enluting] 
The termes 
of the art 
alcumysti- 
cal devised 
of purpose 
to bring 
credit to 
cousenage. 
The first Chapter. 
Of the art of Alcumystrie, of their woords of art and devises to 
bleare me?is eies, and to procure credit to their profession. 
ERE I thought it not impertinent to saie somewhat of the 
art or rather the craft of Alcumystrie, otherwise called 
Multiplication ; which Chaucer, of all other men, most 
livelie deciphereth. In the bowels herof dooth both 
witchcraft and conjuration lie hidden, as whereby some cousen others, 
and some are cousened themselves. For by this mysterie (as it is 
said in the chanons mans prolog) 
They take upon them to turtle upside downe, 
All the earth betwixt Southwarke Gr' Canturdurie towne, 
Atid to pave it all of silver and gold, Ssr'c. 
But ever they lacke of their conclusion. 
And to much folke they doo illusion. 
For their stuffe slides awaie so fast, 
That it makes them beggers at the last, 
A nd by this craft they doo never win. 
But make their pursse eniptie, and their wits thin. 
And bicause the practisers heereof would be thought wise, learned, 
cunning, and their crafts maisters, they have devised words of art, 
sentences and epithets obscure, and confectious* so innu/merable 
(which are also compounded of strange and rare simples) as confound 
the capacities of them that are either set on worke heerein, or be 
brought to behold or expect their conclusions. For what plaine man 
would not beleeve, that they are learned and jollie fellowes, that have 
in such readinesse so many mysticall termes of art : as (for a tast) 
their subliming, amalgaming, engluting,* imbibing, incorporating, 
cementing, ritrination, terminations, mollifications, and indurations 
of bodies, matters combust and coagulat, ingots, tests, &c. Or who 
is able to conceive (by reason of the abrupt confusion, contranetie, 
and multitude of drugs, simples, and confections) the operation and 
mysterie of their stuffe and workemanship. For these things and

--- PAGE 393 ---
of Witchcraft. cimp. 2. 295 
many more, are of necessitie to be prepared and used in the execu- 
tion of this indevor ; namelie orpiment, sublimed Mercurie, iron 
squames, Mercurie crude, groundlie large, bole armoniake, verde- 
grece, borace, boles, gall,* arsenicke, sal armoniake, brimstone,/ salt, 25[0]. 
paper, burnt bones, unsliked lime, claie, saltpeter, vitriall, saltartre, ^^^"J.^^^. p"' 
alcalie, sal preparat, claie made with horsse doong, mans haire, oile 
of tartre, allum, glasse, woort, yest, argoll, resagor,f gleir of an eie, [f Resaigar] 
powders, ashes, doong, pisse, &c. Then have they waters corosive 
and lincall, waters of albification, and waters rubifieng, &c. Also 
oiles, ablutions, and metals fusible. Also their lamps, their urinalles, 
discensories, sublimatories, alembecks, viols, croslets, cucurbits, 
stillatories, and their fornace of calcination : also their soft and 
subtill tiers, some of wood, some of cole, composed speciallie of 
beech, &c. And bicause they will not seeme to want anie point of 
cousenage to astonish the simple, or to moove admiration to their 
enterprises, they have (as they affirme) foure spirits to worke withall, 
whereof the first is, orpiment ; the second, quicksilver ; the third, 
sal armoniake ; the fourth, brimstone. Then have they seven celes- 
tiall bodies ; namelie, Sol, Ltina, Mars, Mercurie, Saturne, Jupiter, 
and Venus ; to whome they applie seven terrestriall bodies ; to wit, 
gold, silver, iron, quickesilver, lead, tinne, and copper, attributing 
unto these the operation of the other ; speciallie if the terrestriall 
bodies be qualified, tempered, and wrought in the houre and daie 
according to the feats* of the celestiall bodies: with more like [•? seats] 
vanitie./ 
The second Chapter. 355. 
The Alcumysters drift, the Chanons yeomans tale, of alcumysticall 
stones and waters. 
lOW you must understand that the end and drift of all 
, their worke, is, to atteine unto the composition of the 
philosophers stone, called Alixer, and to the stone called 
Titanus ; and to Magnatia, which is a water made of the 
foure elements, which (they saie) the philosophers are sworne neither 
to discover, nor to write of. And by these they mortifie quicke silver, 
and make it malleable, and to hold touch : heereby also they convert 
any other mettall (but speciallie copper) into gold. This science 
(forsooth) is the secret of secrets ; even as Salomo7is conjuration is 
said among the conjurors to be so likewise. And thus, when they 
chance to meete with yong men, or simple people, they boast and

--- PAGE 394 ---
296 
14' Booke, 
The discoverie 
Acts. 8. 
G. Chaucer 
in the Cha- 
nons mans 
tale. [Pro- 
logue.] 
251. 
Idem, ibid. 
356. 
The points 
or parts of 
the art Al- 
cumysticall 
which may 
be called 
the mystie 
or smokie 
brag, and saie with Simon Magus, that they can worke miracles, and 
bring mightie things to passe. In which respect Chaucer truelie 
heereof saith : 
Each man is as wise as Salomon, 
When they are togither everichone : 
But he that seemes wisest, is most foole in preefe. 
And he that is truest, is a verie theefe. 
They seeme friendlie to them that knowe nought. 
But they are feendlie both in word and thought, 
Yet many men ride and seeke their acquaintance, 
Not knowing of their false governance.] 
He also saith, and experience verifieth his assertion, that they 
looke ill favouredlie, & are alwaies beggerlie attired : his words are 
these : 
These fellowes looke ill favouredlie. 
And are alwaies tired beggerlie,] 
So as by smelling and thredbare araie. 
These folke are knowne and discerned alwaie. 
But so long as they have a sheet to wrap them in by night. 
Or a rag to hang about them in the day light, 
They will it spend in this craft. 
They cannot stint till nothi}ig be laft. 
Here 07ie may learne if he have ougJit, 
To multiplie and bring his good to naught. 
But if a man aske them privilie, 
Whie they are clothed so unthriftilie. 
They will round him in the eare and saie, 
If they espied were, men would them slaie, 
And all bicause of this noble science : 
Lo thus these folke beetraien innocence. 
The tale of the chanons yeoman published by Chaucer, dooth 
make (by waie of example) a perfect demonstration of the art of 
Alcumystrie or multiplication : the effect whereof is this. A chanon 
being an Alcumyster or cousenor, espied a covetous preest, whose 
pursse he knew to be well lined, whome he assaulted with flatterie 
and subtill speach, two principall points belonging to this art. At 
the length he borrowed monie of the preest, which is the third part 
of the art, without the which the professors can doo no good, nor 
indure in good estate. Then he at his dale repaied the monie, which 
is the most difficult point in this art, and a rare experiment. Finallie, 
to requite the preests courtesie, he promised unto him such instruc-

--- PAGE 395 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 3. 29; 
tions, as wherby with expedition he should become infinitelie rich, 
and all through this art of multiplication. And this is the most 
common point in this science ; for herein they must be skilfull 
before they can be famous, or atteine to anie credit. The preest 
disliked not his proffer ; speciallie bicause it tended to his profit, 
and embraced his courtesie. Then the chanon willed him foorthwith 
to send for three ownces of quicke silver, which he said he would 
transubstantiate (by his art) into perfect silver. The preest thought 
that a man of his profession could not dissemble, and therefore with * 
great joy and hope accomplished his request./ 
And now (forsooth) goeth this jollie Alcumyst about his busines 337. 
and worke of multiplication, and causeth the preest to make a fier of 
coles, in the bottome whereof he placeth a croslet ; and pretending 
onelie to helpe the preest to laie the coles handsomelie, he foisteth 
into the middle ward or lane of coles, a beechen cole, within the 
which was conveied an ingot of perfect silver, which (when the cole 
was consumed) slipt downe into the croslet, that was (I saie) directlie 
under it. The preest perceived not the fraud, but received the ingot jj^yst/^bau 
of silver, and was not a little joy/full to see such certeine successe to catch a 
proceed from his owne handle worke wherein could be no fraud (as 
he surelie conceived) and therefore verie willinglie gave the cannon 
fortie pounds for the receipt of this experiment, who for that summe 
of monie taught him a lesson in Alcumystrie, but he never returned 
to heare repetitions, or to see how he profited. 
The third Chapter, 
Of a yeoman of the countrie cousened by an Alcumyst. 
COULD cite mania Alcumysticall cousenages wrought by 
Doctor Burcot, Feates, and such other ; but I will passe 
them over, and onelie repeate three experiments of that 
art ; the one practised upon an honest yeoman in the 
countie of Kent, the other upon a mightie prince, the third upon a 
covetous preest. And first touching the yeoman, he was overtaken 
and used in maner and forme following, by a notable cousening 
varlot, who professed Alcumystrie, juggling, witchcraft, and conjura- 
tion : and by meanes of his companions and confederals discussed 
the simplicitie and abilitie of the said yeoman, and found out his 
estate and humor to be convenient for his purpose ; and finallie 
came a wooing (as they saie) to his daughter, to whome he made 
QQ

--- PAGE 396 ---
298 
14 Booke. 
The discoverie 
Note the 
cousening 
conveiance 
of this al- 
cumystical 
practitio- 
ner. 
A notable 
foole. 
love ciinninglie in words, though his purpose tended to another 
matter. And among other illusions and tales, concerning his owne/ 
j§8. commendation, for welth, parentage, inheritance, alliance, activitie, 
learning, pregnancie, and cunning, he boasted of his knowledge and 
experience in Alcumystrie ; making the simple man beleeve that he 
could multiplie, and of one angell make two or three. Which seemed 
strange to the poore man, in so much as he became willing enough 
to see that conclusion : whereby the Alcumyster had more hope and 
» comfort to atteine his desire, than if his daughter had yeelded to have 
maried him. To be short, he in the presence of the said yeoman, 
did include within a little ball of virgine wax, a couple of angels ; 
and after certeine ceremonies and conjuring words he seemed to 
deliver the same unto him : but in truth (through legierdemaine) he 
conveied into the yeomans hand another ball of the same scantling, 
wherein were inclosed manie more angels than were in the ball which 
he thought he had received. Now (forsooth) the Alcumyster bad 
him laie up the same ball of wax, and also use certeine ceremonies 
(which I thought good heere to omit). And after certeine dales, 
houres, and minuts they returned together, according to the appoint- 
ment, and found great gaines by the multiplication of the angels. 
Insomuch as he, being a plaine man, was heereby persuaded, that he 
should not onelie have a rare and notable good sonne in lawe ; but 
a companion that might helpe to adde unto his welth much treasure, 
and to his estate great fortune and felicitie. And to increase this 
opinion in him, as also to winne his further favour ; but speciallie to 
bring his cunning Alcumystrie, or rather his lewd purpose to passe ; 
he told him that it were follie to multiplie a pound of gold, when as 
easilie they might multiplie a millian : and therefore counselled him/ 
25?. to produce all the monie he had, or could borrowe of his neighbours 
and freends ; and did put him out of doubt, that he would multiplie 
the same, and redouble it exceedinglie, even as he sawe by experience 
how he delt with the small summe before his face. This yeoman, in 
hope of gaines and preferment, &c : consented to this sweete motion, 
and brought out and laid before his feete, not the one halfe of his 
goods, but all that he had, or could make or borrowe anie maner of 
waie. Then this juggling Alcumyster, having obteined his purpose, 
folded the same in a ball, in quantitie farre bigger than the other, and 
conveieng the same into his/ bosome or pocket, delivered another 
ball (as before) of the like quantitie unto the yeoman, to be reserved 
and safelie kept in his chest ; whereof (bicause the matter was of 
importance) either of them must have a key, and a severall locke, 
that no interruption might be made to the ceremonie, nor abuse by 
either of them, in defrauding ech other. Now (forsooth) these cir-

--- PAGE 397 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 4. 299 
cumstances and ceremonies being ended, and the Alcumysters 
purpose therby performed ; he told the yeoman that (untill a certeine 
daie and houre limitted to returne) either of them might emploie 
themselves about their busines, and necessarie affaires ; the yeoman 
to the plough, and he to the citie of London, and in the meane time 
the gold shuld multiplie, &c. But the Alcumyster (belike) having other 
matters of more importance came not just at the houre appointed, 
nor yet at the daie, nor within the yeare : so as, although it were 
somewhat against the yeomans conscience to violate his promise, or 
breake the league ; yet partlie by the longing he had to see, and 
partlie the desire he had to enjoie the fruit of that excellent experi- 
ment, having (for his owne securitie) and the others satisfaction, some 
testimonie at the opening thereof, to witnesse his sincere dealing, he 
brake up the coffer, and lo he soone espied the ball of wax, which he 
himselfe had laid up there with his owne hand. So as he thought 
(if the hardest should fall) he should find his principall : and whie 
not as good increase hereof now, as of the other before. But alas ! 
when the wax was broken, and the metall discovered, the gold was 
much abased, and beecame perfect lead. 
Now who so list to utter his follie, 
Let him come foorth, atid learne to multiplie j 
And everie man that hath ought in his co/er, 
Let him appeare, and waxe a philosopher, 
Ln learning of this elvish nice lore, 
All is in vaine, attd pardee imtch more 
Is to learne a lewd man this sutteltee. 
Fie, speake not thereof it woll not bee : 
For he that hath learning, and he that hath none. 
Conclude alike in multiplicaiione.il 
A couse- 
ning devise 
by running 
awaie to 
save the 
credit of 
the art. 
G Chaucer 
in the tale 
of the cha- 
nons yeo- 
man. [Pro- 
logue.] 
The fourth Chapter. 25 
A certeine king abused by an Alcumyst, and of the kings foole 
a pretie jest, 
HE second example is of another Alcumyst that came to Akingcou- 
a certeine king, promising to worke by his art manie Aicumy- 
great things, as well in compounding and transubstantiat- ^f'^- 
ing of mettals, as in executing of other exploites of no 
lesse admiration. But before he beganne, he found the meanes to

--- PAGE 398 ---
300 14 Bookc. TJie discoverie 
receive by vertue of the kings warrant, a great summe of monie in 
prest, assuring the king and his councell, that he would shorthe 
returne, and accomplish his promise, &c. Soone after, the kings 
foole, among other jestes, fell into a discourse and discoverie of fooles, '
and handled that common place so pleasantlie, that the king began i
to take delight therein, & to like his merrie veine. Whereupon he '
would needes have the foole deliver unto him a schedull or scroll, 
conteining the names of all the most excellent fooles in the land. 
So he caused the kings name to be first set downe, and next him 
all the names of the lords of his privie councell. The king seeing 
him so sawcie and malepert, ment to have had him punished : but 
some of his councell, knowing him to be a fellow pleasantlie con- 
ceipted, besought his majestie rather to demand of him a reason of \
his libell, &c : than to proceed in extremitie against him. Then the 
foole being asked why he so sawcilie accused the king and his 
councell of principall follie, answered ; Bicause he sawe one foolish 
knave beguile them all, and to cousen them of so great a masse of ;
monie, and finallie to be gone out of their reach. Why (said one of \
the councell) he male returne and performe his promise, &c. Then 
(quoth the foole) I can helpe all the matter easilie. How (said the ^
king) canst thou doo that ? Marie sir (said he) then I will blotte out \
your name, and put in his, as the most foole in the world. Manie 
other practises of the like nature might be hereunto annexed, for the \
j6i. detection of their kna/verie and deceipts whereupon this art dependeth, '
whereby the readers male be more delighted in reading, than the 
practisers benefited in simplie using the same. For it is an art ^
consisting wholie of subtiltie and deceipt, whereby the ignorant and ;
plaine minded man through his too much credulitie is circumvented, |
and the humor of the other slie cousener satisfied. i
The fift Chapter. 
Eras, in col- 
loq. de arte 
alciimysttca. 
255. 
A notable storie written by Erasmus of two Alcumysts, also of 
longation and curtation. 
HE third example is reported by Erasmus, whose excel- 
lent learning and wit is had to this dale in admiration. 
He in a certeine dialog intituled Alcumystica doth finelie 
bewraie the knaverie of this craftie art ;/ wherein he 
proposeth one Balbine, a verie wise, learned, and devout preest, 
howbeit sucli a one as was bewitched, and mad upon the art of

--- PAGE 399 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 5. 301 
Alcumystrie. Which thing another cousening preest perceived, and 
dealt with him in maner and forme following. 
M. Doctor Balbine (said he) I being a stranger unto you maie ^ flattering 
111 1 ^ clawing 
seeme verie saucie to trouble your worship with my bold sute, who preamble, 
alwaies are busied in great and divine studies. To whome Balbine, 
being a man of few words, gave a nodde : which was more than he 
used to everie man. But the preest knowing his humor, said ; I am 
sure sir, if you knew my sute, you would pardon mine importunitie, 
I praie thee good sir John (said Balbine) shew me thy mind, and be 
breefe. That shall I doo sir (said he) with a good will. You know 
M. Doctor, through your skill in philosophie, that everie mans destinie 
is not alike ; and I for my part am at this point, that I cannot tell 
whether I maie be counted happie or infortunate. For when I weigh 
mine owne case, or rather my state, in part I seeme fortunate, and in 
part miserable. But Balbine being a man of some surlinesse, alwaies 
willed him to draw his matter to a more compendious forme : which 
thing the preest/ said he would doo, and could the better performe ; ^62. 
bicause Balbine himselfe was so learned and expert in the verie mat- 
ter he had to repeat, and thus he began. 
I have had, even from my childhood, a great felicitie in the art of 
Alcumystrie, which is the verie marrow of all philosophie. Balbine 
at the naming of the word Alcumystrie, inclined and yeelded himselfe 
more attentivelie to hearken unto him : marie it was onelie in gesture 
of bodie ; for he was spare of speech, and yet he bad him proceed 
with his tale. Then said the preest, Wretch that I am, it was not my 
lucke to light on the best waie : for you IVI. Balbine know (being so 
universallie learned) that in this art there are two waies, the one Longation 
called longation, the other curtation ; and it was mine ill hap to fall ^j^'^ '^'^''^f 
upon longation. When Balbine asked him the difference of those cumystrie. 
two waies ; Oh sir said the preest, you might count me impudent, to 
take upon me to tell you, that of all other are best learned in this art, 
to whome I come, most humblie to beseech you to teach me that 
luckie waie of curtation. The cunninger you are, the more easilie 
you maie teach it me : and therefore hide not the gift that God hath 
given you, from your brother, who maie perish for want of his desire 
in this behalfe ; and doubtlesse Jesus Christ will inrich you with 
greater blessings and endowments. 
Baliine being abashed partlie with his importunitie, and partlie 
with the strange circumstance, told him that (in truth) he neither 
knew what longation or curtation meant ; and therefore required him 
to expound the nature of those words. Well (quoth the preest) since 
it is your pleasure, I will doo it, though I shall thereby take upon me 
to teach him that is indeed much cunninger than my selfe. And thus he

--- PAGE 400 ---
302 14. Booke. The discoverie 
Note how began : Oh sir, they that have spent all the daies of their life in this 
ne^r drcum- divine facultic, doo turne one nature and forme into another, two waies, 
venteth jg yerie breefe, but somewhat dangerous ; the other much lon- 
Balbine. ' ... 
ger, mane verie safe, sure, and commodious. Howbeit, I thinke my 
selfe most unhappie that have spent my time and travell in that 
256. waie which utterlie misliketh me, and/ never could get one to shew 
me the other that I so earnestlie desire. And now I come to your 
worship, whom I know to be wholie learned and expert herein, 
hoping that you will (for charities sake) comfort your brother,/ 
363. whose felicitie and well doing now resteth onelie in your hands ; and 
therefore I beseech you releeve me with your counsell. 
By these and such other words when this cousening varlot had 
avoided suspicion of guile, and assured Balbine that he was perfect 
and cunning in the other waie : Balbi7ie his fingers itched, and his 
hart tickled ; so as he could hold no longer, but burst out with 
these words : Let this curtation go to the divell, whose name I did 
never so much as once heare of before, and therefore doo much lesse 
understand it. But tell me in good faith, doo you exactlie under- 
stand longation .'' Yea said the preest, doubt you not hereof : but I 
have no fansie to that waie, it is so tedious. Why (quoth Balbine') 
what time is required in the accomplishment of this worke by waie of 
Faire words longation ? Too too much said the Alcumyster, even almost a whole 
fafne*, anV^ yccre : but this is the best, the surest, and the safest waie, though it be 
blind the" manie moneths prolonged, before it yeeld advantage for cost and 
wise. charges expended thereabouts. Set your hart at rest (said Balbine) it 
is no matter, though it were two yeeres, so as you be well assured to 
bring it then to passe. 
Finallie, it was there and then concluded, that presentlie the preest 
should go in hand with the worke, and the other should beare the 
charge, the gaines to be indifferentlie divided betwixt them both, and 
the worke to be doone privilie in Balbins house. And after the 
mutuall oth was taken for silence, which is usuall and requisite alwaies 
in the beginning of this mysterie ; Balbine delivered monie to the Al- 
cumyster for bellowes, glasses, coles, &c : which should serve for the 
erection and furniture of the forge. Which monie the Alcumyster 
had no sooner fingered, but he ran merilie to the dice, to the alehouse, 
& to the stewes, and who there so lustie as cousening sir John : who 
indeed this waie made a kind of alcumysticall transformation of monie. 
Now Balbine urged him to go about his businesse, but the other told 
him, that if the matter were once begun, it were halfe ended : for 
therein consisted the greatest difficultie. 
Well, at length he began to furnish the fornace, but now forsooth a 
new supplie of gold must be made, as the seed and spawne of that

