 the toothsom^es of the 
meate which he bare, that by little and little he devoured up all the 
roots saving one, which was a verie faire and a goodlie great one 
indeed. Now when Conon was come to the court, it was his lucke to 
stand in such a place, as the king passing by, and spieng the man, 
did well remember him, and commanded that he should be brought 
in. Conott verie cheerelie followed his guide hard at the heeles, and 
no sooner sawe the king, but bluntlie comming to him, reached out

--- PAGE 409 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 
his hand, and presented the gift to his maiestie. The king received 
it with more cheerefulnes than it was offered, and bad one of those 
that stood next him, to take it, and laie it up among those things which 
he esteemed most, & had in greatest accompt. Then he had Conon 
to dine with him, and after dinner gave tlie countriman great thanks 
for his rape roote ; who made no bones of the matter, but boldlie made 
challenge and claime to the kings promised courtesie. Whereupon 
the king commanded, that a thousand crownes should be given him A princeiie 
, , . largesse. 
m recompense for his roote. 
The report of this bountifulnes was spred in short space over all 
the kings houshold : in so much as one of his courtiers, in hope of 
the like or a larger reward gave the king a verie proper ginnet. 
Whose drift the king perceiving, and judging that his former liberalitie 
to the clowne, provoked the courtier to this covetous attempt, tooke 
the ginnet verie thankefullie : and calling some of nis noble men 
about him, began to consult with them, what mends he might make 
his servant for his horsse. Whiles this was a dooing, the courtier 
conceived passing good/ hope of some princeiie largesse, calculating j^^. 
and casting his cards in this maner ; If his maiestie rewarded a 
sillie clowne so bountifullie for a simple rape roote, what will he doo 
to a jollie courtier for a gallent gennet ? Whiles the king was de- 
bating the matter, and one said this, another that, and the courtier 
travelled all the while in vaine hope, at last saith the king, even upon 
the sudden ; I have now bethought me what to bestowe upon him : 
and calling one of his nobles to him, whispered him in the eare, and 
willed him to fetch a thing, which he should find in his chamber 
wrapped up in silke. The roote is brought wrapped in silke, which sic ars delu- 
the/ king with his owne hands gave to the courtier, using these words ^^^^arte. 
therewithall, that he sped well, in so much as it was his good hap to 
have for his horsse a jewell that cost him a thousand crownes. The 
courtier was a glad man, and at his departing longed to be looking 
what it was, and his hart dansed for joy. In due time therefore he 
unwrapped the silke (a sort of his fellow courtiers flocking about him 
to testifie his good lucke) and having unfolded it, he found therein a 
drie and withered rape roote. Which spectacle though it set the 
standers about in a lowd laughter, yet it quailed the courtiers courage, 
and cast him into a shrewd fit of pensifenes. Thus was the con- 
fidence of this courtier turned to vanitie, who upon hope of good speed 
was willing to part from his horsse for had I wist. 
This storie dooth teach us into what foUie and madnes vaine hope The mo- 
may drive undiscreete and unexpert men. And therefore no mervell pramisseli. 
though Alcumysters dreame and dote after double advantage, faring 
like Aesops dog, who greedilie coveting to catch and snatch at the

--- PAGE 410 ---
312 
i4. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Homer. 
375- 
Englished by 
Abraham 
Fleming. 
A III. Persi- 
us, satyr. 3. 
Englished by 
Abraham 
Fleming. 
265. 
Idem, ibid. 
By Ab.FU- 
rning. 
shadowe of the flesh which he carried in his mouth over the water, 
lost both the one and the other : as they doo their increase and their 
principall. But to breake off abruptlie from this matter, and to leave 
these hypocrits (for whie may they not be so named, who as Homer, 
speaking in detestation of such rakehelles, saith verie divinelie and 
trulie ; 
Odi etenim seu claustra Erebi, quictinque loqutintur 
Ore aliud, tacitoque aliud sub pectore claudutit :\ 
I hate even as the gates of hell, 
Those that one thing with toong doo tell, 
A7id 7iotwithstanding closelie keepe. 
Another thing in hart full deepe) 
To leave these hypocrits (I saie) in the dregs of their dishonestie, 
I will conclude against them peremptorilie, that they, with the rable 
above rehearsed, and the rowt hereafter to be mentioned, are ranke 
couseners, and consuming cankers to the common wealth, and there- 
fore to be rejected and excommunicated from the fellowship of all 
honest men. For now their art, which turneth all kind of metals that 
they can come by into mist and smoke, is no lesse apparent to the 
world, than the cleere sunnie raies at noone sted ; in so much that I 
may saie with the poet, 
Hos popidiis ridet, multihnque torosa juventus 
Ingemijiat treniiclos naso crispante cachimws : 
All people lazigh them now to scorne, 
each strong and htstie blood 
Redoubleth quavering laughters lowd 
with wrinkled nose a good. 
So that, if anie be so addicted unto the vanitie of the art Alcumys- 
ticall/ (as everie foole will have his fansie) and that (beside so manie 
experimented examples of divers, whose wealth hath vanished like a 
vapor, whiles they have beene over rash in the practise hereof) this 
discourse will not moove to desist from such extreame dotage, I saie 
to him or them and that aptlie, 
 dicitque facitque quod ipse 
Non sani esse hominis Jion sanus juret Orestes . 
He saith and dooth that verie thing, 
which mad Orestes might 
With oth averre beecame a man 
beereft of reason right, j

--- PAGE 411 ---
of Witchcraft. chap i. 313 
^ The XV. Booke. 376. 
The first Chapter. 
The exposition of lidojii, and where it is found, whereby the whole 
art of conjuration is deciphered. 
HIS word lidoni is derived of lada, which properiie signi- 
fieth to knowe : it is sometimes translated, *Divitius, which ['■' //«/.] 
is a divinor or soothsaier, as in Dent. i8. Levit. 20 : some- 
times *Ariohis, which is one that also taketh upon him to 
foretell things to come, and is found Levit. 19. 2. Kings. 23. Esai. 19. 
To be short, the opinion of them that are most skilful! in the toongs, The large 
is, that it comprehendeth all them, which take upon them to knowe ono'fthe'" 
all things past and to come, and to give answers accordinglie. It 
alwaies foUoweth the word *0b, and in the scriptures is not named 
severallie from it, and differeth little from the same in sense, and 
doo both concerne oracles uttered by spirits, possessed people, or 
couseners. What will not couseners or witches take upon them to 
doo ? Wherein will they professe ignorance ? Aske them anie 
question, they will undertake to resolve you, even of that which 
none but God knoweth. And to bring their purposes the better 
to passe, as also to winne further credit unto the counterfet art 
which- they professe, they procure confederates, whereby they worke 
wonders. And when they have either learning,/ eloquence, or 266. 
nimblenesse of hands to accompanie their confederacie, or ra/ther 
knaverie, then (forsooth) they passe the degree of witches, and intitle vide Phi- 
themselves to the name of conjurors. And these deale with no infe- %fs^h^rese- 
riour causes : these fetch divels out of hell, and angels out of heaven ; p'fj^g^-^^^" 
these raise up what bodies they list, though they were dead, buried, 
and rotten long before ; and fetch soules out of heaven or hell with 
much more expedition than the pope bringeth them out of purgatorie. 
These I sale (among the simple, and where they feare no law nor 
accusation) take upon them also the raising of tempests, and earth- 
quakes, and to doo as much as God himselfe can doo. These are no 
small fooles, they go not to worke with a baggage tode, or a cat, as 7- Wierusin 
witches doo ; but with a kind of majestic, and with authoritie they ^archia°die- 
call up by name, and have at their commandement seventie and nine momun. 
principall and princelie divels, who have under them, as their minis- 
ters, a great multitude of legions of pettie divels ; as for example. 
S S

--- PAGE 412 ---
3 1 4 15. Books. The discoverie 
The second Chapter. 
Salomons 
notes of 
conjura- 
tion. 
Baell. 
Agarts. 
Marbas. 
[* itai:\ 
Amon. 
Barbatos. 
An invent arie of the na}nes, shapes, powers, goverriement, and 
effects of divels and spirits, of their several! segniories and de- 
grees : a strange discourse woorth the reading. 
HEIR first and principall king (which is of the power of 
the east) is called Baell ; who when he is conjured up, 
appeareth with three heads ; the first, like a tode ; the 
second, like a man ; the third, like a cat. He speaketh 
with a hoarse voice, he maketh a man go invisible, he hath under his 
obedience and rule sixtie and six legions of divels. 
The first duke under the power of the east, is named Agares, he 
commeth up mildlie in the likenes of a faire old man, riding upon a 
crocodile, and carrieng a hawke on his fist ; hee teacheth presentlie 
all maner of toongs, he fetcheth backe all such as runne awaie, and 
maketh them runne that stand still ; he overthroweth all dignities 
j/c?. supernaturall and temporall, hee maketh earth/quakes, and is of the 
order of vertues, having under his regiment thirtie one legions. 
Marbas, *alias Barbas is a great president, and appeareth in the 
forme of a mightie lion ; but at the commandement of a conjuror 
commeth up in the likenes of a man, and answereth fullie as touching 
anie thing which is hidden or secret : he bringeth diseases, and 
cureth them, he promoteth wisedome, and the knowledge of mechani- 
call arts, or handicrafts ; he changeth men into other shapes," and 
under his presidencie or gouvernement are thirtie six legions of divels 
conteined. 
Amon, or Aamon, is a great and mightie marques, and commeth 
abroad in the likenes of a woolfe, having a serpents taile, spelling 
267. out and/ breathing flames of fier ; when he putteth on the shape of a 
man, he sheweth out dogs teeth, and a great head like to a mightie 
raven ; he is the strongest prince of all other, and understandeth of 
all things past and to come, he procureth favor, and reconcileth both 
freends and foes, and ruleth fourtie legions of divels. 
Barbatos, a great countie or earle, and also a duke, he appeareth in 
Signo sagittarii sylvestris, with foure kings, which bring companies 
and great troopes. He understandeth the singing of birds, the bark- 
ing of dogs, 'the lowings of bullocks, and the voice of all living 
creatures. He detecteth treasures hidden by magicians and in- 
chanters, and is of the order of vertues, which in part beare rule : 
he knoweth all things past, and to come, and reconcileth freends

--- PAGE 413 ---
of Witchcraft. cuap. 2. 315 
and powers ; and governeth thirtie legions of divels by his au- 
thoritie. 
Buer is a great president, and is scene in this signe ; he absoliitelie Buer. 
teacheth philosophic niorall and naturall, and also logicke, and the 
vertue of herbes : he giveth the best familiars, he can heale all 
diseases, speciallie of men, and reigneth over fiftie legions. 
Gicsoin is a great duke, and a strong, appearing in the forme of a Gmoin. 
Xenophilus, he answereth all things, present, past, and to come, ex- 
pounding all questions. He reconcileth freendship, and distributeth 
honours and dignities, and ruleth over fourtie legions of divels. 
BoHs, othervi'ise Otis, a great president and an earle he com-/ BoHs. 
meth foorth in the shape of an ouglie viper, and if he put on jyg. 
humane shape, he sheweth great teeth, and two homes, carrieng a 
sharpe sword in his hand : he giveth answers of things present, 
past, and to come, and reconcileth friends, and foes, ruling sixtie 
legions. 
Bathin, sometimes called Mathim, a great duke and a strong, he Batkin. 
is seene in the shape of a verie strong man, with a serpents taile, 
sitting on a pale horsse, understanding the vertues of hearbs and 
pretious stones, transferring men suddenlie from countrie to countrie, 
and ruleth thirtie legions of divels. 
Purson, *alias Curson, a great king, he commeth foorth like a man Purson. 
with a lions face, carrieng a most cruell viper, and riding on a beare ; -^''^^ J 
and before him go alwaies trumpets, he knoweth things hidden, and 
can tell all things present, past, and to come : he bewraieth treasure, 
he can take a bodie either humane or aierie ; he answereth truelie of 
all things earthlie and secret, of the divinitie and creation of the world, 
and bringeth foorth the best familiars ; and there obeie him two and 
twentie legions of divels, partlie of the order of vertues, & partlie of 
the order of thrones. 
Eligor, * alias Abigor, is a great duke, and appeereth as a EUgor. 
goodlie knight, carrieng a lance, an ensigne, and a scepter : he 
answereth fullie of things hidden, and of warres, and how 
souldiers should meete : he knoweth things to come, and pro- 
cureth the favour of lords and knights, governing sixtie legions of 
divels. 
Leraie, *alias Oray, a great marquesse, shewing himselfe in the like-/ Lemit. 
nesse of a galant archer, carrieng a bowe and a quiver, he is author 268. 
of all battels, he dooth putrifie all such wounds as are made with 
arrowes by archers, Quos optimos objicit iribtis diebiis, and he hath 
regiment over thirtie legions. 
Valefar, *alias Malephar, is a strong duke, comming foorth in the vale/ar. 
shape of a lion, and the head of a theefe, he is verie familiar with them

--- PAGE 414 ---
3i6 
15 Booke 
The discoverie 
Morax. 
[o Ital.] 
If OS. 
3S0. 
Naberius. 
Glasya La- 
bolas. 
Zepar. 
Bileth. 
to whom he maketh himselfe acquainted, till he hath brought them to 
the gallowes, and ruleth ten legions. 
Morax, * alias Foraii, a. great earle and a president, he is seene like 
a bull, and if he take unto him a mans face, he maketh men wonder- 
full cunning in astronomie, & in all the liberall sciences : he giveth 
good familiars and wise, knowing the power & vertue of hearbs and 
stones which are pretious, and ruleth thirtie six le/gions. 
Jpos, *alias Ayporos, is a great earle and a prince, appeering in the 
shape of an angell, and yet indeed more obscure and filthie than a lion, 
with a lions head, a gooses feet, and a hares taile : he knoweth things 
to come and past, he maketh a man wittie, and bold, and hath under 
his jurisdiction thirtie six legions. 
Naberius, *alias Cerberus, is a valiant marquesse, shewing himselfe 
in the forme of a crowe, when he speaketh with a hoarse voice : he 
maketh a man amiable and cunning in all arts, and speciallie in 
rhetorike, he procureth the losse of prelacies and dignities : nineteene 
legions heare and obeie him. 
Glasya Labolas, *alias Caacrinolaas, or Caassimolar, is a great 
president, who commeth foorth like a dog, and hath wings like a griffen, 
he giveth the knowledge of arts, and is the captaine of all mansleiers: 
he understandeth things present and to come, he gaineth the minds 
and love of freends and foes, he maketh a man go invisible, and hath 
the rule of six and thirtie legions. 
Zepar is a great duke, appearing as a souldier, inflaming women 
with the loove of men, and when he is bidden he changeth their 
shape, untill they male enjoie their beloved, he also maketh them 
barren, and six and twentie legions are at his obeie and com- 
mandement. 
Bileth is a great king and a terrible, riding on a pale horsse, before 
whome go trumpets, and all kind of melodious musicke. When he is 
called up by an exorcist, he appeareth rough and furious, to deceive 
him. Then let the exorcist or conjuror take heed to himself, and to 
allaie his courage, let him hold a hazell bat in his hand, wherewithall 
he must reach out toward the east and south, and make a triangle 
without besides the circle ; but if he hold not out his hand unto him, 
and he bid him come in, and he still refuse the bond or chaine of 
spirits ; let the conjuror proceed to reading, and by and by he will 
submit himselfe, and come in, and doo whatsoever the exorcist com- 
mandeth him, and he shalbe safe. If Bileth the king be more 
stubborne, and refuse to enter into the circle at the first call, and the 
conjuror shew himselfe fearfull, or if he have not the chaine of spirits, 
certeinelie he will never feare nor regard him after. Also, if the 
place be unapt for a triangle to be made without the circle, then set

--- PAGE 415 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 2. 317 
there a boll of/ wine, and the ex/orcist shall certeinlie knowe when he 269. 381. 
commeth out of his house, with his fellowes, and that the foresaid 
Bileth will be his helper, his friend, and obedient unto him when he 
commeth foorth. And when he commeth, let the exorcist receive him 
courteouslie, and glorifie him in his pride, and therfore he shall 
adore him as other kings doo, bicause he saith nothing without other 
princes. Also, if he be cited by an exorcist, alwaies a silver ring of 
the middle finger of the left hand must be held against the exorcists 
face, as they doo for Amaimon. And the dominion and power of so VideAmai- 
great a prince is not to be pretermitted ; for there is none under the 
power & dominion of the conjuror, but he that deteineth both men 
and women in doting love, till the exorcist hath had his pleasure. 
He is of the orders of powers, hoping to returne to the seaventh 
throne, which is not altogether credible, and he ruleth eightie five 
legions. 
Sitri, *alias Bitru, is a great prince, appeering with the face of a sitHd. baw- 
leopard, and having wings as a griffen : when he taketh humane shape, 
he is verie beautifull, he inflameth a man with a womans love, and 
also stirreth up women to love men, being commanded he willinglie 
*deteineth secrets of women, laughing at them and mocking them, p See note.] 
to make them luxuriouslie naked, and there obeie him sixtie 
legions. 
Pai inon is more obedient to Lucifer \}i\2cc\. other kings are. Lucifef Paimon. 
is heere to be understood he that was drowned in the depth of his 
knowledge : he would needs be like God, and for his arrogancie was 
throwne out into destruction, of whome it is said ; Everie pretious Ezech. 88. 
stone is thy covering. Paimon is constrained by divine vertue to 
stand before the exorcist ; where he putteth on the likenesse of a 
man : he sitteth on a beast called a dromedarie, which is a swift 
runner, and weareth a glorious crowne, and hath an effeminate 
countenance. There goeth before him an host of men with trumpets 
and well sounding cymbals, and all musicall instruments. At the 
first he appeereth with a great crie and roring, as in Circulo Salomonis, 
and in the art is declared. And \it}ci\%Pai)no7i speake sometime that 
the conjuror understand him not, let him not therefore be dismaied. 
But when he hath delivered him the first obligation, to observe his 
desire, he must bid him also answer him distinctlie and plainelie to 
the questi/ons he shall aske you, of all philosophic, wisedome, and 382. 
science, and of all other secret things. And if you will knowe the 
disposition of the world, and what the earth is, or what holdeth it up 
in the water, or any other thing, or what is Abyssus, or where the 
wind is, or from whence it commeth, he will teach you aboundantlie. 
Consecrations also as well of sacrifices as otherwise maybe reckoned.

--- PAGE 416 ---
3i8 
15. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Cautions 
for the Ex- 
orcist or 
conjuror. 
The fall of 
Beliall. 
Salomon 
gathered al 
the divels 
togither in 
a brasen 
vessell. 
He giveth dignities and confirmations ; he bindeth them that resist 
him in his owne chaines, and subjecteth them to the conjuror ; he 
prepareth good familiars, and hath the understanding of all arts. 
Note, that at the calling up of him, the exorcist must looke towards 
the northwest, bicause there is his house. When he is called up, let 
the exorcist receive him constantlie without feare, let him aske what 
questions or demands he list, and no doubt he shall obteine the same 
270. of him. And the exorcist must beware/ he forget not the creator, for 
those things, which have beene rehearsed before o{ Paimon, some saie 
he is of the order of dominations ; others saie, of the order of cherubim. 
There follow him two hundred legions, partlie of the order of angels, 
and partlie of potestates. Note that if be cited alone by an 
offering or sacrifice, two kings followe him ; to wit, Beball & Abalam, 
& other potentates : in his host are twentie five legions, bicause the 
spirits subject to them are not alwaies with them, except they be 
compelled to appeere by divine vertue. 
Some saie that the king Beliall was created immediatlie after 
Lucifer, and therefore they thinke that he was father and seducer of 
them which fell being of the orders. For he fell first among the 
worthier and wiser sort, which went before Michael and other heavenlie 
angels, which were lacking. Although Beliall went before all them 
that were throwne downe to the earth, yet he went not before them 
that tarried in heaven. This Beliall is constrained by divine vertue, 
when he taketh sacrifices, gifts, and offerings, that he againe may 
give unto the offerers true answers. But he tarrieth not one houre in 
the truth, except he be constrained by the divine power, as is said. 
He taketh the forme of a beautifull angell, sitting in a firie chariot ; 
he speaketh faire, he distributeth preferments of senatorship, and the 
favour of friends, and excellent familiars : he hath rule over eightie 
legions, partlie of the order of vertues, partlie of angels ; he/ 
j<5?j. is found in the forme of an exorcist in the bonds of spirits. The 
exorcist must consider, that this Beliall doth in everie thing assist 
his subjects. If he will not submit himselfe, let the bond of spirits 
be read : the spirits chaine is sent for him, wherewith wise Salomon 
gathered them togither with their legions in a brasen vessell, where 
were inclosed among all the legions seventie two kings, of whome 
the cheefe was Bileth, the second was Beliall, the third Asmoday, 
and above a thousand thousand legions. Without doubt (I must 
confesse) I learned this of my maister Salomon ; but he told me not 
why he gathered them together, and shut them up so : but I beleeve 
it was for the pride of this Beliall. Certeine nigromancers doo saie, 
that Salomon, being on a certeine dale seduced by the craft of a 
certeine woman, inclined himselfe to praie before the same idoll. 
4

--- PAGE 417 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 2. 
Beliall by name : which is not credible. And therefore we must 
rather thinke (as it is said) that they were gathered together in that 
great brasen vessell for pride and anogancie, and throwne into a 
deepe lake or hole in Babylon. For wise Salomon did accomplish 
his workes by the divine power, which never forsooke him. And 
therefore we must thinke he worshipped not the image Beliall ; for 
then he could not have constrained the spirits by divine vertue : for 
this Beliall, with three kings were in the lake. But the Babylonians The Baby- 
woondering at the matter, supposed that they should find therein a a°pp'o"nted^' 
great quantitie of treasure, and therefore with one consent went ^^||^®''' 
downe into the lake, and uncovered and brake the vessell, out of the 
which immediatlie flew the capteine divels, and were delivered to 
their former and proper places. But this Beliall entred into a certeine 
image, and there gave answer to them that offered and sacrificed 
unto him : as Tocz. in his sentences reporteth, and the Babylonians 
did worship and sacrifice thereunto./ 
Bicne is a great and a strong Duke, he appeareth as a dragon with Bune. 271. 
three heads, the third whereof is like to a man ; he speaketh with a 
divine voice, he maketh the dead to change their place, and divels to 
assemble upon the sepulchers of the dead: he greatlie inricheth a 
man, and maketh him eloquent and wise, answering trulie to all 
demands, and thirtie legions obeie him. 
Forneus is a great marquesse, like unto a monster of the sea, he Forneus. 
maketh men woonderfull in rhetorike, he adorneth a man/ with a J<5V- 
good name, and the knowledge of toongs, and maketh one beloved 
as well of foes as freends : there are under him nine and twentie 
legions, of the order partlie of thrones, and partlie of angels. 
Rotiove a marquesse and an earle, he is resembled to a monster, Ronove. 
he bringeth singular understanding in rhetorike, faithfull servants, 
knowledge of toongs, favour of freends and foes ; and nineteene 
legions obeie him. 
Berith is a great and a terrible duke, and hath three names. Of Berith a 
some he is called Beall ; of the Jewes Berith ; of Nigromancers dWen? 
Boljry : he commeth foorth as a red souldier, with red clothing, and 
upon a horsse of that colour, and a crowne on h