a 
witch. 
Item, a witnesse uncited, and offering himselfe in this case is to be 
heard, and in none other. 
Item, a capitall enimie (if the enimitie be pretended to growe by 
34. meanes of witchcraft) may object against a witch ; and none / exception 
is to be had or made against him. 
Par. m L. Item, although the proofe of perjurie may put backe a witnesse in 
Bat .Spineus, 
/. Bod. de 
damon, lib. J. 
cap. 2. 
Alexander. 
L. ubi Hume- 
rus de testibus. 
I Bod. de da- 
inon. lib. 2. 
cap. 2.

--- PAGE 117 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 4 
all other causes ; yet in this, a perjured person is a good and lawful! 
witnesse. 
Item, the proctors and advocats in this case are compelled to be 
witnesses against their clients, as in none other case they are to be 
constrained there unto. 
Item, none can give evidence against witches, touching their 
assemblies, but witches onelie : bicause (as Bodin saith) none other 
can doo it. Howbeit, Ri. Ga. writeth, that he came to the God speed, 
and with his sword and buckler killed the divell ; or at the least he 
wounded him so sore, that he made him stinke of brimstone. 
Item, Bodin saith, that bicause this is an extraordinarie matter ; 
there must heerein be extraordinarie dealing : and all maner of waies 
are to be used, direct and indirect. 
post, legatum, 
9. his, de Us 
quibus ut indig. 
Alex. cap. 72. 
L. 2. (ic. 
In his foolish 
pamphlet of the 
execution of 
Windsor witches 
The fourth Chapter. 
Confessions of witches., whereby they are condemned. 
OME witches confesse (saith Bodin) that are desirous to 
die ; not for glorie, but for despaire : bicause they are 
tormented in their life time. But these may not be 
spared (saith he) although the lawe dooth excuse them. 
The best and surest confession is at shrift, to hir ghostlie father. 
Item, if she confesse manie things that are false, and one thing that 
may be true ; she is to be taken and executed upon that confession. / 
Item, she is not so guiltie that confesseth a falshood or lie, and 
denieth a truth ; as she that answereth by circumstance. 
Item, an equivocall or doubtfuU answer is taken for a confession 
against a witch. / 
Item, Bodt7t reporteth, that one confessed that he went out, or 
rather up into the aire, and was transported manie miles to the fairies 
danse, onelie bicause he would spie unto what place his wife went to 
bagging, and how she behaved hir selfe. Whereupon was much a doo 
among the inquisitors and lawyers, to discusse whether he should be 
executed with his wife or no. But it was concluded that he must die, 
bicause he bewraied not his wife : the which he forbare to doo, 
Propter reverentiatn honoris &^ familice. 
Item, if a woman confesse freelie herein, before question be made ; 
and yet afterward denie it : she is neverthelesse to be burned. 
Item, they affirme that this extremitie is herein used, bicause not 
one among a thousand witches is detected. And yet it is affirmed by 
Sprenger, in M. Mai. that there is not so little a parish, but there are 
manie witches knowne to be therein. 
/. Bod. lib. 4. 
cap. 3. 
Is there anie 
probabiiitio that 
sucli would con- 
tinue witches ? 
Idem Ibid. 
Joan. An. ad 
speculat. tit. , m 
de litis con- 
test, part. 2. 
L. non alie- 
num eodon. 
25- 
L. de cptat. 5. 
nihil eodem. 
(ic. 
I. Bod. de dee- 
mono lib. 4. 
cap. 3.

--- PAGE 118 ---
20 Chap. 5- The discoverie 
I. Bod. de die- 
mono, lib. 4 
cap. 4. 
26. 
I. Bod. de die- 
mono, lib. 4. 
cap. 4. 
L. decuriojii 
de fienis. 
Panorm. & 
Felin. in C. 
veniens. i. 
de testib. parsi 
causa. 154. 
Lib. 4. numero. 
12. usq; a 18. 
18. 
The fift Chapter. 
Presumptions., whereby witches are condemned. 
F anie womans child chance to die at hir hand, so as no 
bodie knoweth how ; it may not be thought or presumed 
that the mother killed it, except she be supposed a witch : 
and in that case it is otherwise, for she must upon that 
presumption be executed ; except she can proove the negative or 
contrarie. 
Item, if the child of a woman that is suspected to be a witch, be 
lacking or gone from hir ; it is to be presumed, that she hath sacrificed 
it to the divell : except she can proove the negative or contrarie. 
Item, though in other persons, certeine points of their confessions 
may be thought erronious, and imputed to error : yet (in witches 
causes) all oversights, imperfections, and escapes must / be adjudged 
impious and malicious, and tend to hir confusion and condemnation. 
Item, though a theefe be not said in lawe to be infamous in any 
other matter than in theft ; yet a witch defamed of witchcraft is said 
to be defiled with all maner of faults and infamies universallie, 
though she were not condemned ; but (as I said) defamed with the 
name of a witch. For rumors and reports are sufficient (saith Bodin) 
to condemne a witch. 
Item, if any man, woman, or child doo sale, that such a one is a 
witch ; it is a most vehement suspicion (saith Bodin) and sufficient 
to bring hir to the racke : though in all other cases it be directlie 
against lawe. 
Item, in presumptions and suspicions against a witch, the common 
brute or voice of the people cannot erre. 
Item, if a woman, when she is apprehended, crie out, or sale ; I 
am undoone ; Save my life ; I will tell you how the matter standeth, 
&c : she is thereupon most vehementlie to be suspected and con- 
demned to die. / 
Item, though a conjurer be not to be condemned for curing the 
diseased by vertue of his art : yet must a witch die for the like case. 
Item, the behaviour, looks, becks, and countenance of a woman, 
are sufficient signes, whereby to presume she is a witch : for alwais 
they looke downe to the ground, and dare not looke a man full in 
the face. 
Item, if their parents were thought to be witches, then is it 
certeinlie to be presumed that they are so : but it is not so to be 
thought of whoores. 
Item, it is a vehement presumption if she cannot weepe, at the

--- PAGE 119 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 6. 
time of hir examination : and yet Boditi saith, that a witch may shed 
three drops out of hir right eie. 
Item, it is not onehe a vehement suspicion, and presumption, but 
an evident proofe of a witch, if any man or beast die suddenhe where 
she hath beene seene latelie ; although hir witching stuffe be not 
found or espied. 
Item, if any bodie use familiaritie or companie with a witch 
convicted ; it is a sufficient presumption against that person to be 
adjudged a witch. / 
Item, that evidence that may serve to bring in any other person to 
examination, may serve to bring a witch to her condemnation. 
Item, herein judgment must be pronounced & executed (as Bodin 
saith) without order, and not like to the orderlie proceeding and forme 
of judgement in other crimes. 
Item, a witch may not be brought to the torture suddenlie, or before 
long examination, least she go awaie scotfree : for they feele no 
torments, and therefore care not for the same (as Bodifi affirmeth.) 
Item, little children may be had to the torture at the first dash ; 
but so may it not be doone with old women : as is aforesaid. 
Item, if she have anie privie marke under hir arme pokes, under 
hir haire, under hir lip, or in hir buttocke, or in hir privities : it is a 
presumption sufficient for the judge to proceed and give sentence of 
death upon hir. 
The onlie pitie they shew to a poore woman in this case, is; that 
though she be accused to have slaine anie bodie with her inchant- 
ments ; yet if she can bring foorth the partie alive, she shall not be 
put to death. Whereat I marvell, in as much as they can bring the 
divell in any bodies likenesse and representation. 
Item, their lawe saith, that an uncerteine presumption is sufficient, 
when a certeine presumption faileth. 
The sixt Chapter, 
Particular hiterogatories used by the inquisitors against witches. 
NEEDE not staie to confute such parciall and horrible 
dealings, being so apparentlie impious, and full of tyrannie 
which except I should have so manifestlie detected, even 
with their owne writings and assertions, few or none 
would have beleeved. But for brevities sake I will passe over the 
same ; supposing that the ci / ting of such absurdities may stand for 
a suffici / ent confutation thereof. Now therefore I will proceed to a 
more particular order and maner of examinations, &c : used by the 
inquisitors, and allowed for the most part throughout all nations. 
27. 
L. 5. de adult. 
§. gl.ti Bart, 
c. venerabilis 
de electio. 
I. Bod. dc da- 
mono, lib. 4. 
cap. 4. 
Ide>7i Ibid. 
Cap. pmterea 
cum glos. exit a 
de test. 
Panortnit. in 
C. vener. col. 
2. eodem, iii . 
28. 
19,

--- PAGE 120 ---
22 
Chap. 7. 
The discoverie 
yial. male/, 
super, inter- 
rog. 
Seneca in 
tragced. 
Mai. male/, 
fart. 3. qucest 
15. act. 10. 
Num. 1 1, 4. 
1, Sam. 11,4. 
2. Sa. 15, 23. 
Mat. g. 4 13 & 
22. & 24. & 25. 
Luke 3.&C. 
Seneca in 
tiagced. 
Eccl. 35, 15. 
Triall of teares. 
Mai. Male/, 
qua. 15, pa. 3. 
First the witch must be demanded, why she touched such a child, 
or such a cow, &c : and afterward the same child or cow fell sicke 
or lame, &c. 
Item, why hir two kine give more milke than hir neighbors. And 
the note before mentioned is heere againe set downe, to be speciallie 
observed of all men : to wit ; that Though a witch cannot weepe, yet 
she may speake with a crieng voice. Which assertion of weeping is 
false, and contrarie to the saieng of Seneca, Cato, and manie others ; 
which affirme, that A woman weepeth when she meaneth most deceipt : 
and therefore saith M. Mai. she must be well looked unto, otherwise 
she will put spettle privilie upon hir cheeks, and seeme to weepe : 
which rule also Bodin saith is infallible. But alas that teares should 
be thought sufficient to excuse or condemne in so great a cause, and so 
weightie a triall ! I am sure that the woorst sort of the children of 
Israel wept bitterlie : yea, if there were any witches at all in Israel, 
they wept. For it is written, that all the children of Israel wept. 
Finallie, if there be any witches in hell, I am sure they weepe : for 
there is weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth. 
But God knoweth, many an honest matrone cannot sometimes in 
the heavines of her heart shed teares ; the which oftentimes are 
more readie and common with craftie queanes and strumpets, than 
with sober women. For we read of two kinds of teares in a womans 
eie, the one of true greefe, the other of deceipt. And it is written, 
that Dediscere flerc fccminajn est inendacium : which argueth, that 
they lie which say, that wicked women cannot weepe. But let these 
tormentors take heed, that the teares in this case which runne downe the 
widowes cheeks, with their crie spoken of by Jesus Sirach, be not 
heard above. But lo what learned, godlie, and lawfull meanes these 
popish inquisitors have invented for the triall of true or false teares. / 
The seventh Chapter, 
Tke inquisitors triall of weeping by conjuration. 
CONJURE thee by the amorous teares, which Jesus 
Christ our Saviour shed upon the crosse for the salvation 
of the world ; and by the most earnest and burning teares 
of his mother the most glorious virgine Marie, sprinkled 
upon his wounds late in the evening ; and by all the teares, which 
everie saint and elect vessell of God hath powred out heere in the 
world, and from whose eies he hath wiped awaie all teares ; that if 
thou be without fault, thou maist powre downe teares aboundantlie ; 
and if thou be guiltie, that thou weepe in no wise : In the name of the 
father, of the sonne, and of the holie ghost ; Amen. And note (saith 
20 he) that the more you conjure, the lesse she weepeth. / 
29.

--- PAGE 121 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 8. 
The eight Chapter. 
Certaine cautions against witches, and of their tortures to procure 
co7ifcssion. 
iUT to manifest their further follies, I will recite some of 
1 their cautions, which are published by the ancient inquisi- 
P tors, for perpetuall lessons to their successors : as followeth. 
I The first caution is that, which was last rehearsed con- 
cerning weeping ; the which (say they) is an infallible note. 
Secondlie, the judge must beware she touch no part of him, 
speciallie of his bare ; and that he alwaies weare about his necke 
conjured salt, palme, herbes, and waxe halowed : which (say they) are 
not onelie approoved to be good by the witches confessions ; but / also 
by the use of the Romish church, which halloweth them onelie for 
that purpose. 
Item, she must come to hir arreignement backward, to wit, with hir 
taile to the judges face, who must make manie crosses, at the time of 
hir approching to the barre. And least we should condemne that 
for superstition, they prevent us with a figure, and tell us, that the 
same superstition may not seeme superstitious unto us. But this 
resembleth the persuasion of a theefe, that dissuadeth his sonne from 
stealing ; and neverthelesse telleth him that he may picke or cut a 
pursse, and rob by the high waie. 
One other caution is, that she must be shaven, so as there remaine 
not one haire about hir : for sometimes they keepe secrets for tacitur- 
nitie, and for other purposes also in their haire, in their privities, and 
betweene their skinne and their flesh. For which cause I marvell 
they flea them not: for one of their witches would not burne, being in 
the middest of the flame, as M. Mai. reporteth ; untill a charme 
written in a little scroll was espied to be hidden betweene hir skin 
and flesh, and taken awaie. And this is so gravelie and faithfullie 
set downe by the inquisitors themselves, that one may beleeve it if 
he list, though indeed it be a verie lie. The like lie citeth Bodin, of 
a witch that could not be strangled by the executioner, doo what he 
could. But it is most true, that the inquisitor Cumanus in one yeare 
did shave one and fourtie poore women, and burnt them all when he 
had done. 
Another caution is, that at the time and place of torture, the hal- 
lowed things aforesaid, with the seaven words spoken on the crosse, be 
hanged about the witches necke ; and the length of Christ in waxe be 
knit about hir bare naked bodie, with relikes of saints, &c. All which 
stuffe (sale they) will so worke within and upon them, as when they 
Ja. Sprenger. 
H. Institor. 
30- 
Mai. malef. 
pa. 3, qua. 15. 
Prolepsis or 
Pmeoccupation. 
Mai. maUf. 
John. Bod. 
Anno. 1435 a 
knave inquisi- 
tor. 
Q. 16. de tem- 
pore & modo 
tnterrog.

--- PAGE 122 ---
24 Chap. g. The discoverie 
are racked and tortured, they can hardlie staie or hold themselves 
from confession. In which case I doubt not but that pope, which 
Blasphemous blasphemed Christ, and curssed his mother for a pecocke, and curssed 
thrt^name'thl '^^^ great despights for a peece of porke, with lesse compulsion 
'hird- would have renounced the trinitie, and have worshipped the divell 
1. upon his knees./ 
Another caution is, that after she hath beene racked, and hath 
passed over all tortures devised for that purpose ; and after that she 
31- hath beene compelled to drinke holie water, she be conveied / againe 
to the place of torture : and that in the middest of hir torments, hir 
accusations be read unto hir ; and that the witnesses (if they will) be 
brought face to face unto hir : and finallie, that she be asked, whether 
Mai. male/. for triall of hir innocencie she will have judgement, Candentis ferri, 
far. 3, qua. I . y^hjch is ; To Carrie a certeine weight of burning iron in hir bare hand. 
But that may not (saie they) in anie wise be granted. For both 
M. Mai. and Bodin also affirme, that manie things may be promised, 
but nothing need be performed : for whie, they have authoritie to 
promise, but no commission to performe the same. 
Another caution is, that the judge take heed, that when she once 
beginneth to confesse, he cut not off hir examination, but continue it 
night and daie. For many-times, whiles they go to dinner, she re- 
turneth to hir vomit. 
Another caution is, that after the witch hath confessed the annoie- 
ing of men and beasts, she be asked how long she hath had Inatbus, 
when she renounced the faith, and made the reall league, and what 
that league is, &c. And this is indeede the cheefe cause of all their 
incredible and impossible confessions : for upon the racke, when they 
have once begunne to lie, they will saie what the tormentor list. 
The last caution is, that if she will not confesse, she be had to some 
strong castle or gaole. And after certeine daies, the gaolor must 
make hir beleeve he goeth foorth into some farre countrie : and then 
some of hir freends must come in to hir, and promise hir, that if she 
will confesse to them, they will suffer hir to escape out of prison : 
which they may well doo, the keeper being from home. And this 
Mai. male/. waie (saith M. Mai.) hath served, when all other meanes have failed. 
And in this place it may not be omitted, that above all other times, 
they confesse upon fridaies. Now saith James Sprenger, and Henrie 
Institor, we must saie all, to wit : If she confesse nothing, she should 
be dismissed by lawe ; and yet by order she may in no wise be bailed, 
but must be put into close prison, and there be talked withall by 
some craftie person (those are the words) and in the meane while 
there must be some eves-dropers with pen and inke behind the wall, 
to hearken and note what she confesseth : or else some of hir old

--- PAGE 123 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 9. 
companions and acquain / tance may come in and talke with hir of old 
matters, and so by eves-droppers be also bewraied ; so as there shall 
be no end of torture before she have confessed what they will./ 33 
The Ninth Chapter. 
The ffteeiie critjies laid to the charge of witches, by witchmongers j 
speciallie by Bodin, in Da7nononiania. 
jHEY denie God, and all religion. 
Answere* Then let them die therefore, or at the least [» 
be used like infidels, or apostataes. 
They cursse, blaspheme, and provoke God with all 
despite. 
Answere.* Then let them have the law expressed in Levit. 24. and 
Deut. 13. & 17. 
They give their faith to the divell, and they worship and offer sacri- 
fice unto him. 
Ans. Let such also be judged by the same lawe. 
They doo solemnelie vow and promise all their progenia unto the 
divell. 
Ans. This promise proceedeth from an unsound mind, and is not 
to be regarded ; bicause they cannot performe it, neither will it be 
prooved true. Howbeit, if it be done by anie that is sound of mind, 
let the cursse of Jeremie. 32. 36. light upon them, to wit, the sword, 
famine and pestilence. 
They sacrifice their owne children to the divell before baptisme, 
holding them up in the aire unto him, and then thrust a needle into 
their braines. 
Ans. If this be true, I maintaine them not herein : but there is a 
lawe to judge them by. Howbeit, it is so contrarie to sense and 
nature, that it were follie to beleeve it ; either upon Bodins bare word, 
or else upon his presumptions ; speciallie when so small commoditie 
and so great danger and inconvenience insueth to the witches thereby. 
They burne their children when they have sacrificed them. i 
Ans. Then let them have such punishment, as they that offered 
their children unto Moloch : Levit. 20. But these be meere / devises 33 
of witchmoongers and inquisitors, that with extreame tortures 
have wroong such confessions from them ; or else with false reports 
have beelied them ; or by flatterie & faire words and promises have 
woon it at their hands, at the length. 
They sweare to the divell to bring as manie into that societie as 7 
they can. 
Ans. This is false, and so prooved elsewhere. 
E

--- PAGE 124 ---
26 2, Booke. The discoverie 
8 They sweare by the name of the divell. 
A71S. I never heard anie such oth, neither have we warrant to kill 
them that so doo sweare ; though indeed it be verie lewd and impious. 
9 They use incestuous adulterie with spirits. 
Ans. This is a stale ridiculous lie, as is prooved apparentlie 
hereafter. 
10 They boile infants (after they have murthered them unbaptised) 
untill their flesh be made potable. 
23. Ans. This is untrue, incredible, and impossible./ 
1 1 They eate the flesh and drinke the bloud of men and children 
openlie. 
Ans. Then are they kin to the Anthropophagi 2ind Canibals. But 
I beleeve never an honest man in England nor in France, will afifirme 
that he hath seene any of these persons, that are said to be witches, 
do so ; if they shuld, I beleeve it would poison them. 
1 2 They kill men with poison. 
Ans. Let them be hanged for their labour. 
1 3 They kill mens cattell. 
Ans. Then let an action of trespasse be brought against them for 
so dooing. 
14 They bewitch mens corne, and bring hunger and barrennes into 
the countrie ; they ride and flie in the aire, bring stormes, make 
tempests, &c. 
Ans. Then will I worship them as gods ; for those be not the 
works of man, nor yet of witch : as I have elsewhere prooved at 
large. 
1 5 They use venerie with a divell called Incubus., even when they lie 
in bed with their husbands, and have children by them, which become 
the best witches. 
Ans This is the last lie, verie ridiculous, and confuted by me else- 
34 where. / 
The tenth Chapter. 
A refutation of the former surmised crimes patched togither by 
Bodin, and the onelie waie to escape the inquisitors hands. 
F more ridiculous or abhominable crimes could have 
beene invented, these poore women (whose cheefe fault 
is that they are scolds) should have beene charged with 
them. 
In this libell you dooe see is conteined all that witches are charged 
with ; and all that also, which anie witchmoonger surmiseth, or in 
malice imputeth unto witches power and practise.

--- PAGE 125 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 10. 
Some of these crimes may not onelie be in the power and will of a 
witch, but may be accomplished by naturall meanes : and therefore by 
them the matter in question is not decided, to wit ; Whether a witch 
can worke woonders supernaturallie ? For manie a knave and whore 
dooth more commonlie put in execution those lewd actions, than such 
as are called witches, and are hanged for their labour. 
Some of these crimes also laid unto witches charge, are by me 
denied, and by them cannot be prooved to be true, or committed by 
any one witch. Othersome of these crimes likewise are so absurd, 
supernatural], and impossible, that they are derided almost of all men, 
and as false, fond, and fabulous reports condemned : insomuch as the 
very witchmoongers themselves are ashamed to heare of them. 
If part be untrue, why may not the residue be thought false ? For 
all these things are laid to their charge at one instant, even by the 
greatest doctors and patrones of the sect of witchmongers, producing 
as manie proofs for witches supernaturall and impossible actions, as 
for the other. So as, if one part of their accusation be false, the other 
part deserveth no credit. If all be true that is alledged of their 
dooings, why should we beleeve in Christ, bicause of his miracles, 
when a witch dooth as great/ wonders as/ ever he did 
But it will be said by some ; As for those absurd and popish 
writers, they are not in all their allegations, touching these matters, to 
be credited. But I assure you, that even all sorts of writers heerein 
(for the most part) the very doctors of the church to the schoolemen, 
protestants and papists, learned and unlearned, poets and historio- 
graphers, Jewes, Christians, or Gentiles agree in these impossible 
and ridiculous matters. Yea and these writers, out of whome I gather 
most absurdities, are of the best credit and authoritie of all writers in 
this matter. The reason is, bicause it was never throughlie looked 
into ; but everie fable credited ; and the word (Witch) named so often 
in scripture. 
They that have scene further of the inquisitors orders and customes, 
sale also ; that There is no waie in the world for these poore women 
to escape the inquisitors hands, and so consequentlie burning : but to 
gild their hands with monie, wherby oftentimes they take pitie upon 
them, and deliver them, as sufficientlie purged. For they have 
authoritie to exchange the punishment of the bodie with the punish- 
ment of the pursse, appheng the same to the office of their inquisi- 
tion : whereby they reape such profit, as a number of 
these seelie women paie them yeerelie pen- 
sions, to the end they may 
not be punished 
againe. 
The question 
or matter in 
controversie ; 
that is to sa)', 
the proposition 
or theme. 
24. 
35- 
A generall error. 
The onelie way 
for witches to 
avoid the in- 
quisitors handb

