in one 
new man ; that is, that he might joine, couple, or gather together, 
&c. 
Furthermore, the Pneiniiatomachi by these testimonies insuing 
endevor to proove the holie spirit to be a creature. Out of John the 
I. chap. By this word were all things made, and without it nothing 
was made. Out of i. Cor. 8. Wee have one God the father, even he 
from whome are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, 
through whome are all things, and we by him. Out of the i. Coloss. 
By him were all things made, things in heaven, and things in earth, 
visible and invisible, &c. Now if al things were made by the sonne, 
it followeth that by him the holie spirit was also made. 
* Whereto I answer, that when all things are said to be made by 
the sonne, that same universall proposition is restrained by John 
himselfe to a certeine kind of things : Without him (saith the evan- 
gelist) was nothing made that was made. Therefore it is first to be 
shewed that the holie spirit was made, and then will we conclude out 
of John, that if he were made, he was made of the sonne. The 
scripture doth no where saie that the holie spirit was made of the 
father or of the sonne, but to proceed, to come, and to be sent from 
them both. Now if these universall propositions are to suffer no 
restraint, it shall follow that the father was made of the sonne : than 
the which what is more absurd and wicked ? 
Againe, they object out of Matth. ii. None knoweth the sonne

--- PAGE 563 ---
Divels and spirits. chap. 34. 465 
but the father, and none the father but the sonne ; to wit, of and by The spirit 
himselfe : for otherwise both the angels, & to whomsoever else it noTt'he'^fa- 
shall please the sonne to reveale the father, these doo know both the ''i^'' & '^s 
father and the sonne. Now if so be the spirit be not equall with the 
father and the sonne in knowledge, he is not onelie unequall and 
lesser than they, but also no God: for ignorance is not/ incident unto ^34. 
God. 
* Whereto I answer, that where in holie scripture we doo meete » 6. Answer, 
with universall propositions negative or exclusive, they are not to be ^us7ve^pro- 
expounded of one person, so as the rest are excluded ; but creatures positions or 
or false gods are to be excluded, and whatsoever else is without or are'tobe 
beside the essence and being of God. Reasons to proove and con- 'j^'^f'^'"^^' 
firme this interpretation, I could bring verie manie, whereof I will 
adde some for example. In the seaventh of JoJui it is said ; When 
Christ shall come, none shall knowe from whence he is : notwithstand- 
ing which words the Jewes thought that neither God nor his angels 
should be ignorant from whence Christ/ should be. In the fourth to 397. 
the Galathiaiis ; A mans covenant or testament confirmed with 
authoritie no bodie dooth abrogate, or adde anie thing thereunto. 
No just man dooth so ; but tyrants and truce-breakers care not for 
covenants. In John eight ; Jesus was left alone, and the woman 
standing in the middest. And yet it is not to be supposed that a 
multitude of people was not present, and the disciples of Christ like- 
wise ; but the word Solus, alone, is referred to the womans accusers, 
who withdrew themselves awaie everie one, and departed. In the 
sixt of Marke ; When it was evening, the ship was in the middest of 
the sea, and he alone upon land : he was not alone upon land or 
shore, for the same was not utterlie void of dwellers : but he had not 
anie of his disciples with him, nor anie bodie to carrie him a ship- 
boord unto his disciples. Manie phrases or formes of speeches like 
unto these are to be found in the sacred scriptures, and in authors 
both Greeke and Latine, whereby we understand, that neither univer- 
sall negative nor exclusive particles are strictlie to be urged, but to 
be explaned in such sort as the matter in hand will beare. When as 
therefore the sonne alone is said to know the father, and it is de- 
Imanded 
whether the holie spirit is debarred from knowing the father ; 
out of other places of scriptures judgment is to be given in this case. 
In some places the holie spirit is counted and reckoned with the 
father and the sonne jointlie : wherefore he is not to be separated. 
Else-where also it is attributed to the holie spirit that he alone dooth 
know the things which be of God, and searcheth the deepe secrets 
of God : wherefore from him the knowing of God is not to be ex- 
cluded./ 
I

--- PAGE 564 ---
466 
Chap. 34. 
A discourse of 
7. Objectio. 
The spirit 
praieth lor 
7. Answer. 
The spirit 
dooth pro- 
voke us to 
praic. 
8. Objeclia. 
The spirit 
is sent from 
the father 
and the son. 
8. Answer. 398. 
How the 
spirit is 
sent. 
335. They doo yet further object, that it is not convenient or fit for God 
after the manner of suters to humble and cast downe himselfe : but 
the holie spirit dooth so, praieng and intreating for us with unspeake- 
able grones : Rom. 8. Ergo the holie spirit is not God. 
* Whereto I answer that the holie spirit dooth praie and intreat, in 
so much as he provoketh us to praie, and maketh us to grone and 
sigh. Oftentimes also in the scriptures is that action or deed 
attributed unto God, which we being stirred up and mooved by him 
doo bring to passe. So it is said of God unto Abraham ; Now I 
know that thou fearest God : and yet before he would have sacrificed 
Isaacli, God knew the verie heart of Abraham : and therefore this 
word Cog7tovi, I know, is as much as Cognoscere feci, I have made or 
caused to know. And that the spirit to praie and intreat, is the same 
that, to make to praie and intreat, the apostle teacheth even there, 
writing that we have received the spirit of adoption, in whome we 
crie Abba Father. Where it is manifest that it is we which crie, the 
Holie-ghost provoking and forcing us thereunto. 
Howbeit they go further, and frame this reason. Whosoever is 
sent, the same is inferior and lesser than he of whome he is sent, and 
furthermore he is of a comprehensible substance, bicause he passeth 
by locall motion from place to place : but the holie spirit is sent of 
the father and the sonne, John. 14, 15, & 16. It is powred foorth and 
shed upon men. Acts. 10. Ergo the holie spirit is lesser than the 
Father and the Sonne, and of a comprehensible nature, and conse- 
quentlie not verie God./ 
* Whereto I answer first, that he which is sent is not alwaies lesser 
than he that sendeth : to proove which position anie meane wit may 
inferre manie instances. Furthermore, touching the sending of the 
holie spirit, we are here to imagine no changing or shifting of place. 
For if the spirit when he goeth foorth from the father and is sent, 
changeth his place, then must the father also be in a place, that he 
may leave it and go to another. And as for the incomprehensible 
nature of the spirit, he cannot leaving his place passe unto another. 
Therefore the sending of the spirit is the eternall and unvariable will 
of God, to doo something by the holie spirit ; and the revealing and 
336. executing of this will by the/ operation and working of the spirit. 
The spirit was sent to the apostles ; which spirit was present with 
them, sith it is present everie-where : but then according to the will 
of God the father hee shewed himselfe present and powerfull. 
Some man may sale ; If sending be a revealing and laieng open of 
presence and power, then may the father be said to be sent, bicause 
he himselfe is also revealed. I answer, that when the spirit is said to 
be sent, not onlie the revealing, but the order also of his revealing is

--- PAGE 565 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 34. 
467 
declared ; bicause the will of the father and of the sonne, of whom he 
is sent, going before, not in time, but in order of persons, the spirit 
dooth reveale himselfe, the father, and also the sonne. The father 
revealeth himselfe by others, the sonne and the holie spirit, so that 
his will goeth before. Therefore sending is the common worke of all 
the three persons ; howbeit, for order of dooing, it is distinguished by 
diverse names. The father will reveale himselfe unto men with the 
Sonne and the spirit, and be powerfuU in them, and therefore is said 
to send. The sonne and the spirit doo assent unto the will of the 
father, and will that to be doone by themselves, which God will to be 
doone by them ; these are said to be sent. And bicause the will of 
the sonne dooth go before the spirit in order of persons, he is also said 
to send the spirit. 
Yet for all this they allege, that if the spirit had perfection, then ^1°''^"''^°' 
would he speake of himselfe, and not stand in need alwaies of anothers speaketh 
admonishment : but he speaketh not of himselfe, but speaketh what "eUe.^'"™ 
he heareth, as Christ expresselie testifieth John. 16. Ergo he is un- 
perfect, and whatsoever he hath it is by partaking, and consequentlie 
he is not God. 
* Whereto I answer, that this argument is stale : for it was objected * The 9. an- 
by heretikes long ago against them that held the true opinion, as 
Cyrill saith ; who answereth, that by the words of Christ is rather to Cyriii. Uh. 13. 
be gathered, that the son and the spirit are of the same substance. 3 
For, the spirit is named the mind of Christ, i. Cor. 2: and therefore he 
speaketh not of his owne proper will, or against his will in whom and 
from whom he is ; but hath all his will and working naturallie proceed- 
ing from the substance as it were of him. 
Lastlie they argue thus : Everie thing is either unbegotten or 10. Objec- 
unborne, or begotten and created ; the spirit is not unbegotten,/ 
for then he were the father ; & so there should be two without be- JJ/. 
ginning : neither is he begotten, for then he is begotten of the father, 
and so there shall be two/ sonnes, both brothers ; or hee is begotten 399. 
of the sonne, and then shall he be Gods nephue, than the which what 
can be imagined more absurd.' Ergo he is created. 
* Wherto I answer, that the division or distribution is unperfect : 10 An?, 
for that member is omitted which is noted of the verie best divine Jroceede'ih 
that ever was, even Jesus Christ our saviour ; namelie, to have pro- 
ceeded, or proceeding : That same holie spirit (saith he) which pro- 
ceedeth from the father. Which place Nazanzen dooth thus interpret. 
The spirit, bicause he proceedeth from thence, is not a creature : 
and bicause he is not begotten, he is not the son ; but bicause he is 
the meane of begotten and unbegotten, he shall be God, &c. 
And thus having avoided all these cavils of the *Pneninatouiachi, a -Such were

--- PAGE 566 ---
468 
Cli.i|>. 34. 
A discourse of 
the Arrians, 
Tritheits* 
Samosate- 
nlans, &c. 
[» Tritheists] 
Sus magis in 
coeno gaudet 
quam /ante 
strcno. 
The hethe- 
nish philo- 
sophers ac- 
knowled- 
ged the ho- 
lie spirit. 
55S. 
Cyril!, lib. I. 
contra Ju- 
lianum. 
Marsilins Fi- 
cinus in arg. 
m Cratyl. 
Plat. 400. 
sect of heretikes too too injurious to the holie spirit, insomuch as 
they seeke what they can, to rob and pull from him the right of his 
divinitie; I will all Christians to take heed of their pestilent opinions, 
the poison whereof though to them that be resolved in the truth it 
can doo little hurt, yet to such as stand upon a wavering point it can 
doo no great good. Having thus far waded against them, and over- 
throwne their opinions ; 1 must needs exhort all to whom the reading 
hereof shall come, that first they consider with themselves what a 
reverend mysterie all that hitherto hath beene said in this chapter 
concerneth ; namelie, the spirit of sanctification, and that they so 
ponder places to and fro, as that they reserve unto the holie spirit 
the glorious title of divinitie, which by nature is to him appropriate : 
esteeming of these Pneieinatomachi or Theoniacht., as of swine, de- 
lighting more in the durtie draffe of their devises, than in the faire 
fountaine water of Gods word : yea, condemning them of grosser 
ignorance than the old philosophers, who though they savoured little 
of heavenlie theologie, yet some illumination they had of the holie 
and divine spirit, marrie it was somewhat mistie, darke, lame and 
limping ; neverthelesse, what it was, and how much or little soever it 
was, they gave thereunto a due reverence, in that they acknowledged 
and intituled it Aniniam mundi, The soule or life of the world, and 
(as Nazanzen witnesseth) tov tov Travro^ vouv^ The/ mind of the uni- 
versall, and the outward breath, or the breath that commeth from 
without. Porphyrie expounding the opinion of Plato, who was not 
utterlie blind in this mysterie, saith that the divine substance doth 
proceed and extend to three subsistencies and beings : and that God 
is chieflie and principallie good, next him the second creator, and the 
third to be the soule of the world : for he holdeth that the divinitie 
doth extend even to this soule. As for Hermes Trismegistus, he 
saith that all things have need of this spirit : for according to his 
worthinesse he supporteth all, he quickeneth and susteineth all, and 
he is derived from the holie fountaine, giving breath and life unto 
all, and evermore remaineth continuall, plentifull, and unemptied. 
And here by the waie I give you a note woorth reading and con- 
sidering ; namelie, how all nations in a manner, by a kind of heavenlie 
influence, agree in writing and speaking the name of God with no 
more than foure letters. As for example, the ^Egyptians doo call 
him Theut, the Persians call him Syre, the Jewes expresse his un- 
speakable name as well as they can by/ the word Adonai consisting 
of foure vowels ; the Arabians call him Alia, the Mahometists call 
him Abdi, the Greekes call him Theos, the Latines call him Detis, 
This, although it be not so proper to our present purpose, yet (be- 
cause we are in hand with the holie spirits deitie) is not altogether

--- PAGE 567 ---
Divels and spirits. chap. 34. 469 
impertinent. But why GOD would have his name as it were uni- 
versallie bounded within the number of foure letters, I can give 
sundrie reasons, which require too long a discourse of words by 
digression : and therefore I will conceale them for this time. These 
opinions of philosophers I have willinglie remembred, that it might 
appeare, that the doctrine concerning the holie spirit is verie ancient ; 
which they having taken either out of Moses writings, or out of the 
works of the old fathers, published and set foorth in bookes, though 
not wholie, fullie, and perfectlie understood and knowne : and also 
that our Pneumatomachi may see themselves to be more doltish in 
divine matters than the heathen, who will not acknowledge that 
essentiall and working power of the divinitie wherby all things are 
quickened : which the heathen did after a sort see ; after a sort (I 
saie) bicause they separated the soule of the world (which they also 
call the begotten mind) from the most sovereigne and unbe/gotten SSg. 
God, and imagined certeine differences of degrees, and (as Cyrill 
saith) did Arrianize* in the trinitie. [« Ananize] 
So then I conclude against these Pneumaiomachi, that in so much 
as they imitate the old giants, who piling up Pelion upon Ossa, and Ovid. Ub. me- 
/ , ^7 i J , , ■ , 1 ,1 tamorph. 1. 
them both upon Olympus., attempted by scahng the heavens to pull fab. 5. Ue gi- 
Jupiter out of his throne of estate, & to spoile him of his principalitie, f,^"/'^^^;-^^^ 
and were notwithstanding their strength, whereby they were able to 
carrie huge hilles on their shoulders, overwhelmed with those moun- 
taines, and squized under the weight of them even to the death : so 
these Pnetematomacfii, being enimies both to the holie spirit, and no 
freends to the holie church (for then would they confesse the trinitie 
in unitie, and the unitie in trinitie, and consequentlie also the deitie 
of the holie spirit) deserve to be consumed with the fier of his mouth, 
the heate whereof by no meanes can be slaked, quenched, or avoided. 
For there is nothing more unnaturall, nothing more monstrous, than 
against the person of the deitie (I meane the spirit of sanctification) 
to oppose mans power, mans wit, mans policie, &c : which was well 
signified by that poeticall fiction of the giants, who were termed 
Attgtiipedes, Snakefooted: which as JoacJiiimis Camerarius expoundeth 
of wicked counsellors, to whose filthie persuasion tyrants doo trust as 
vmto their feete ; and James Sadolet interpreteth of philosophers, who Jacob. Sadoi. 
trusting overmuch unto their owne wits, become so bold in challenging 'i'a,,d.' pkUo- 
praise for their wisedome, that in fine all turneth to foUie and con- soph, inscript. 
fusion : so I expound of heretickes and schismatikes, who either by 
corrupt doctrine, or by mainteining precise opinions, or by open 
violence, &c : assaie to overthrow the true religion, to breake the 
unitie of the church, to denie Ccesar his homage, and GOD his dutie, 
&c ; and therefore let Jovis Jiilinen, wherewith they were slaine,

--- PAGE 568 ---
470 Chap. ,4. A discoitrse of spirits. 
assure these that there is Divina iiltio due to all such, as dare in the 
ficklenes of their fansies arreare themselves against the holie spirit ; 
of whom sith they are ashamed here upon earth (otherwise they would 
401. confidentlie and boldlie confesse him both/ with mouth and pen) he 
will be ashamed of them in heaven, where they are like to be so farre 
from having anie societie with the saints, that their portion shalbe 
even in full and shaken measure with miscreants and infidels. And 
^60. therefore let us,/ if we will discerne and trie the spirits whether they 
be of God or no, seeke for the illumination of this inlightning spirit, 
which as it bringeth light with it to discover all spirits, so it giveth 
such a fierie heat, as that no false spirit can abide by it for feare of 
burning. Howbeit the holie spirit must be in us, otherwise this pre- 
rogative of trieng spirits will not fall to our lot. 
Peter Mart. -^^^ here some will peradventure move a demand, and doo aske 
in loc.^com. how the holie spirit is in us, considering that Infiniti ad finilum nulla 
18. jcf/. 33. est proportio, 7teque loci aiigiistia quod immensum est potest circu7ii- 
pag. 628. scribi : of that which is infinite, to that which is finite there is no 
proportion ; neither can that which is unmeasurable be limited or 
bounded within anie precinct of place, &c. I answer, that the most 
excellent father for Christes sake sendeth him unto us, according as 
Christ promised us in the person of his apostles ; The comforter 
John. 14, ;6. (saith he) which is the holie spirit, whome my father will send in my 
name. And as for proportion of that which is infinite to that which 
is finite, &c : I will in no case have it thought, that the holie spirit is 
in us, as a bodie placed in a place terminablie ; but to attribute 
thereunto, as dulie belongeth to the deitie, an ubiquitie, or universall 
presence ; not corporallie and palpablie ; but effectuallie, mightilie, 
John. 16, 14. mysticallie, divinelie, &c. Yea, and this I may boldlie adde, that 
^ '4. i6- Christ Jesus sendeth him unto us from the father: neither is he 
given us for anie other end, but to inrich us abundantlie 
with all good gifts and excellent graces ; 
and (among the rest) with the dis- 
cerning of spirits aright, that 
we be not deceived. 
And here an 
end. 
FINIS.

--- PAGE 569 ---
[Appendix I.] 
[The nine chapters forming the beginning of the fifteenth Book in the third edition, 1665, 
are numbered Ch. I, etc., and Scot's Ch. I made Ch. X, and so onward ] 
*^ «^ «^ »^ y^ vr^ \^ <^ »^ 
^ 1^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 
Chap, I. 
0/ Magical Circles, a7td the reason of their Institution. 
215. 
[This IS the 
paging of 
3rd ed.] 
\gitians, and the more learned sort of Conjurers, make 
use of Circles in various manners, and to various in- 
tentions. First, when convenience serves not, as to 
time or place that a real Circle should be delineated, 
they frame an imaginary Circle, by means of Incan- 
tations and Consecrations, without either Knife, Pensil, 
or Compasses, circumscribing nine foot of ground round about them, 
which they pretend to sanctifie with words and Ceremonies, spattering 
their Holy Water all about so far as the said Limit extendeth ; and 
with a form of Consecration following, do alter the property of the 
ground, that from common (as they say) it becomes sanctifi'd, and 
made fit for Magicall uses. 
Imaginary 
Circles. 
How to consecrate an imaginary Circle. 
LEt the Exorcist, being cloathed with a black Garment, reaching to The form of 
his knee, and under that a white Robe of fine Linnen that falls Consecration, 
unto his ankles, fix himself in the midst of that place where he intends 
to perform his Conjurations : And throwing his old Shooes about ten 
yards from the place, let him put on his consecrated shooes of russet 
Leather with a Cross cut on the top of each shooe. Then with his 
Magical Wand, which must be a new hazel-stick, about two yards of 
length, he must stretch forth his arm to all the four Windes thrice, 
turning himself round at every Winde, and saying all that while with 
fervency : 
I who am the servant of the Highest., do by the vertue of his Holy 
Name Immanuel, sanctifie unto my self the circumference of nine foot

--- PAGE 570 ---
472 
The Discovery 
round about me,!^ /row the East, (ffllaurafi ; from the West, 
(fiarroil ; from the North, Catoil ; fro7n the South, ISerjtfj ; which 
ground I take for tny proper defence from all maligjtant spirits, that 
they may have no power over my soul or body, nor co77ie beyond these 
Limitations, but answer truely being summoned, without daring to 
r* ? Mispr- for transgress their bounds : (HSJorrf).* toonaf). parrot- (ffiamtalon. ►I* 
"Hie^tme for Which Ceremonies being performed, the place so sanctified is 
Conjurations. equivalent to any real Circle whatsoever. And in the composition of 
any Circle for Magical feats, the fittest time is the brightest Moon-light, 
or when storms of lightning, winde, or thunder, are raging through the 
air ; because at such times the infernal Spirits are nearer unto the 
earth, and can more easily hear the Invocations of the Exorcist. 
The places for As for the places of Magical Circles, they are to be chosen melan- 
"'^ cholly, dolefull, dark and lonely ; either in Woods or Deserts, or in a 
place where three wayes meet, or amongst ruines of Castles, Abbies, 
Monasteries, &^c. or upon the Sea-shore when the Moon shines clear, 
or else in some large Parlour hung with black, and the floor covered 
with the same, with doors and windowes closely shut, and Waxen 
Candles lighted. But if the Conjuration be for the Ghost of one 
deceased, the fittest places to that purpose are places of the slain,/ 
216. Woods where any have killed themselves, Church-yards, Burying- 
Vaults, &r^c. As also for all sorts of Spirits, the places of their abode 
ought to be chosen, when they are called ; as Pits, Caves, and hollow 
places, for Subterranean Spirits : The tops of Turrets, for Aerial 
Spirits: Ships and Rocks of the Sea, for Spirits of the Water: Woods 
and Mountains for Faries, Nymphs, and Satyres ; following the like 
order with all the rest. 
The^form of a And as the places where, so the manner how the Circles are to be 
"'^ ^' drawn, ought to be perfectly known. First, for Infernal Spirits, let a 
Circle nine foot over be made with black, and within the same another 
Circle half a foot distant, leaving half a foot of both these Circles 
open for the Magitian and his assistant to enter in : And betwixt these 
Circles round about, write all the holy Names of God, with Crosses 
and Triangles at every Name ; making also a larger triangle at one 
side of the Circle without on this manner with 
the names of the Trinity at the seven corners, ^ 
[tsic] viz. ^e^otoa5,t J^wa^ ISelresJ, Immanuel, written 
in the little circles. / \^ 
Scier'"" °^ "^^^ reason that Magitians give for Circles 
and their Institution, is, That so much ground 
being blessed and consecrated by holy Words, 
hath a secret force to expel all evil Spirits from the bounds thereof; 
and being sprinkled with holy water, which hath been blessed by the

