 from the gallowes by S. Vincents meanes, and at his 
intercession, departed home into Italie. This storie last rehearsed 
is found in Speado exe7nplonan, and repeated also by Robert 
Carociil : bishop of Aquinas, and manie others, and preached 
publikelie in the church of Rome. I 
459- 
The xxxvi. Chapter. 
The storie of Saint Margaret prooved to be both ridiculous and 
i7npious in everie point. ■ 
IRST, that the storie of S. Margaret is a fable, may be 
prooved by the incredible, impossible, foolish, impious, 
and blasphemous matters conteined therein, and by the 
ridiculous circumstance thereof. Though it were cruellie 
doone of hir to beat the divell, when his hands were bound ; yet it 
was courteouslie doone of hir, to pull awaie hir foot at his desire. He

--- PAGE 485 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 37. 
could not speake so long as she troad on his head, and yet he said ; 
Tread off, that I may tell you what I am. She sawe the heavens open, 
and yet she was in a close prison. But hir sight was verie cleare, 
that could see a little dove sitting upon a crosse so farre off. For 
heaven is higher than the sunne; and the sunne, when it is neerest 
to us, is 3966000. miles frorn us. And she had a good paire of eares, 
that could heare a dove speake so farre off. And she had good lucke, 
that S. Peter, who (they saie) is porter, or else the pope, who hath 
more dooings than Peter, had such leisure as to stale the gates so 
long/ for hir. Salojii07i provided no good place, neither tooke good 
order with his brasen bowle. I marvell how they escaped that let out 
the divels. It is marvell also they melted it not with their breath 
long before : for the divels carrie hell and hell lier about with them 
alwaies ; in so much as (they saie) they leave ashes evermore where 
they stand. Surelie she made in hir praier an unreasonable request. 
But the date of hir patent is out : for I beleeve that whosoever at this 
dale shall burne a pound of good candle before hir, shall be never the 
better, but three pence the worsse. But now we may find in S. Mar- 
garets life, who it is that is Christes wife : whereby we are so much 
wiser than we were before. But looke in the life of S. Katharine, 
in the golden legend, and you shall find that he was also married 
to 5. Katharine, and that our ladie made the marriage, &c. An 
excellent authontie for/bigamie. Here I will also cite other of their 
notable stories, or miracles of authoritie, and so leave shaming of 
them, or rather troubhng you the readers thereof Neither would 
I have written these fables, but that they are authentike among the 
papists, and that we that are protestants may be satisfied, as well 
of conjurors and witches miracles, as of the others : for the one is 
as grosse as the other. 
Secundum 
Bordinum 
Corrigens. 
Quoesit. 
Math, tract. 
I. sect. 77. 
333. 
Psellus de 
operatione 
damonum. 
460. 
The xxxvli. Chapter, 
A pleasant miracle %vrought by a popish preest. 
HAT time the Waldenses heresies beganne to spring, /« specula 
certeine wicked men, being upheld and maintained by ^ahTe.''exTib. 
diabolicall vertue, shewed certeine signes and woonders, excmpiorum. 
vvherby they strengthened and confirmed their heresies, gmpi. 69.' 
and perverted in faith many faithfull men ; for they walked on the 
water and were not drowned. But a certeine catholike preest 
seeing the same, and knowing that true signes could not be joined 
with false doctrine, brought the bodie of our Lord, with the pix, to

--- PAGE 486 ---
388 15- Booke. The discovcvic 
Memoran- the Water, where they shewed their power and vertue to the people. 
dum, It IS J • 1 • 1 1 • ,- , r r > 
confessed and Said in the hearing of all that were present : I conjure thee O 
tha^uur divell, by him, whom I carrie in my hands, that thou exercise not these 
miracles great visions and phantasies by these men, to the drowning of this 
cannot be i , , 
joined with people. Notwithstanding these words, when they walked still on the 
tdnef water, as they did before, the preest in a rage threw the bodie of our 
neither pa- Lord, with the pix into the river, and by and by, so soone as the sa- 
nor'con-" ' cramcnt touched the element, the phantasie gave place to the veritie ; 
woJke'^'mi- being prooved and made false, did sinke like lead to the 
racies. bottome, and were drowned ; the pix with the sacrament immediatlie 
was taken awaie by an angell. The preest seeing all these things, 
was verie glad of the miracle, but for the losse of the sacrament he 
was verie pensive, passing awaie the whole night in teares and 
moorning : in the morning he found the pix with the sacrament upon 
the altar.// 
The xxxviii. Chapter. 
Led. in die 
Sanctis Lxicite 
7 8. 
461. 333. The former miracle confuted, with a strange storie of saint Lucie. 
jOW glad Sir John was now it were follie for me to saie. 
How would he have plagued the divell, that threw his 
god in the river to be drowned ? But if other had had 
no more power to destroie the Waldenses with sword and 
fier, than this preest had to drowne them with his conjuring boxe & 
cousening sacraments, there should have beene many a life saved. 
But I may not omit one fable, which is of authoritie, wherein though 
there be no conjuration expressed, yet I warrant you there was 
cousenage both in the doomg and telling thereof, ^g" You shall 
read in the lesson on saint Lucies dale, that she being condemned, 
could not be remooved from the place with a teeme of oxen, neither 
could any fier burne hir, insomuch as one was faine to cut off hir 
head with a sword, and yet she could speake afterwards as long as 
she list. And this passeth all other miracles, except it be that which 
Bodin and M. Mai. recite out of Nider, of a witch 
that could not be burned, till a scroll 
was taken awaie from where 
she hid it, betwixt 
hir skin and 
flesh.

--- PAGE 487 ---
]
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 35. 
The xxxix. Chapter. 
Of visions, noises, apparitions, and imagined sounds, and of other 
illusions, of wandering soules : with a conftitation thereof. 
AN IE thorough melancholic doo imagine, that they see 
or heare visions, spirits, ghosts, strange noises, &c : as 
I have alreadie prooved before, at large. Manie againe 
thorough feare proceeding from a cowardlie nature and 
complexion, or from an effeminate and fond bringing up, are timerous 
and afraid of/ spirits, and bugs, &c. Some through imperfection of 
sight also are afraid of their owne shadowes, and (as Aristotle saith) 
see themselves sometimes as it were in a glasse. And some through 
weakenesse of bodie have such unperfect imaginations. Droonken 
men also sometimes suppose they see trees walke, &c : according to 
that which Salojnon saith to the droonkards ; Thine eies shall see 
strange visions, and mervellous appearances. 
In all ages moonks and preests have abused and bewitched the 
world with counterfet visions ; which proceeded through idlenes, and 
restraint of marriage, wherby they grew hot and lecherous, and 
therefore devised such meanes to compasse and obteine their loves. 
And the simple people being then so superstitious, would never 
seeme to mistrust, that such holie men would make them cuckholds, 
but forsooke their beds in that case, and gave roome to the cleargie. 
Item, little children have beene so scared with their mothers maids, 
that they could never after endure to be in the darke alone, for feare 
of bugs. Manie are deceived by glasses through/ art perspective. 
Manie hearkening unto false reports, conceive and beleeve that which 
is nothing so. Manie give credit to that which they read in authors. 
But how manie stories and bookes are written of walking spirits and 
soules of men, contrarie to the word of God ; a reasonable volume 
cannot conteine. How common an opinion was it among the papists, 
that all soules walked on the earth, after they departed from their 
bodies? In so much as it was in the time of poperie a usuall matter, 
to desire sicke people in their death beds, to appeare to them after 
their death, and to reveale their estate. The fathers and ancient 
doctors of the church were too credulous herein, &c. Therefore no 
mervell, though the common simple sort of men, and least of all, 
that women be deceived herein. God in times past did send downe 
visible angels and appearances to men ; but now he dooth not so. 
Through ignorance of late in religion, it was thought, that everie 
See the sto- 
rie of Simo 
Davie and 
Ada his 
wife, lib. 3. 
cap. 10. pag. 
55, 56, 57- 
462. 
Against the 
counterfet 
visions of 
popish 
preests, & 
other cou- 
sening de- 
vises. 
334. 
i

--- PAGE 488 ---
15- Booke. 
The discoverie 
This do- 
ctrine was 
not onlie 
preached, 
but also 
prooved ; 
note the 
particu- 
lar insta- 
ces fol- 
lowing. 
churchyard swarmed with soules and spirits : but now the word ot 
God being more free, open, and knowne, those conceipts and illusions 
are made more manifest and apparent, &c. 
The doctors, councels, and popes, which (they sale) cannot erre, 
46J. have confirmed the walking, appearing, & raising of soules./ But 
where find they in the scriptures anie such doctrine ? And who 
certified them, that those appearances were true 
Trulie all they 
cannot bring to passe, that the lies which have beene spread abroad 
herein, should now beginne to be true, though the pope himselfe 
subscribe, scale, and sweare thereunto never so much. Where are 
the soules that swarmed in times past .'' Where are the spirits ? 
Who heareth their noises? Who seeth their visions? Where are 
the soules that made such mone for trentals, whereby to be eased of 
the paines in purgatorie ? Are they all gone into Italie, bicause 
masses are growne deere here in England} Marke well this illusion, 
and see how contrarie it is unto the word of God. Consider how all 
papists beleeve this illusion to be true, and how all protestants are 
driven to saie it is and was popish illusion. Where be the spirits 
that wandered to have buriall for their bodies ? For manie of those 
walking soules went about that busines. Doo you not thinke, that 
the papists shew not themselves godlie divines, to preach and teach 
the people such doctrine ; and to insert into their divine service such 
fables as are read in the Romish church, all scripture giving place 
thereto for the time ? You shall see in the lessons read there upon 
S. Stevens dale, that Gamaliel Nichodeinus his kinsman, and Abdias 
his Sonne, with his freend S. Steven, appeared to a certeine preest, 
called Sir Litcian, requesting him to remove their bodies, and to 
burie them in some better place (for they had lien from the time of 
their death, untill then, being in the reigne of Honorms the emperor; 
to wit, foure hundred yeeres buried in the field of Gamaliel, who in 
that respect said to Sir Lucian ; Non 7nei sohimmodo causa solicitus 
sum, sed potiiis pro illis qui mecuin sunt ; that is, I am not onlie 
carefull for my selfe, but cheefelie for those my friends that are with 
me. Whereby the whole course may be perceived to be a false 
practise, and a counterfet vision, or rather a lewd invention. For in 
heaven mens soules remaine not in sorow and care ; neither studie 
335. they there how to compasse/ and get a worshipfull buriall here in 
earth. If they did, they would not have foreslowed it so long. Now 
therefore let us not suffer our selves to be abused anie longer, either 
with conjuring preests, or melancholicall witches ; but be 
thankfull to God that hath delivered us from 
such blindnes and 
error.'

--- PAGE 489 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 40. 
The xl. Chapter. 
464. 
Cardanus opinion of strange noises, how counterfet visions grow 
to be credited, of popish appeerances, of pope Boniface. 
ARDANUS speaking of noises, among other things, 
saith thus ; A noise is heard in your house ; it may be a 
mouse, a cat, or a dog among dishes ; it may be a coun- 
terfet or a theefe indeed, or the fault may be in your 
eares. I could recite a great number of tales, how men have even 
forsaken their houses, bicause of such apparitions and noises : and 
all hath beene by meere and ranke knaverie. And wheresoever you 
shall heare, that there is in the night season such rumbling and 
fearefull noises, be you well assured that it is flat knaverie, performed 
by some that seemetli most to complaine, and is least mistrusted. 
And hereof there is a verie art, which for some respects I will not 
discover. The divell seeketh dailie as well as nightlie whome he 
may devoure, and can doo his feats as well by daie as by night, or 
else he is a yoong divell, and a verie bungler. But of all other 
couseners, these conjurors are in the highest degree, and are most 
worthie of death for their blasphemous impietie. But that these 
popish visions and conjurations used as well by papists, as by the 
popes themselves, were meere cousenages ; and that the tales of the 
popes recited by Bru7io and Platina, of their magicall devises, were 
but plaine cousenages and knaveries, may appeare by the historie of 
Bonifacius the eight, who used this kind of inchantment, to get away 
the popedome from his predecessor Ccelestinus. He counterfetted a 
voice through a cane reed, as though it had come from heaven, per- 
suading him to yeeld up his authoritie of popeship, and to institute 
therein one Bonifacius, a worthier man : otherwise he threatened 
him with damnation. And therfore the foole yeelded it up accord- 
inglie, to the said Bonifacius, An. 1264. of whom it was said ; He 
came in like a fox, lived like a woolfe, and died like a dog./ 
There be innumerable examples of such visions, which when they 
are not detected, go for true stories : and therefore when it is 
answered that some are true tales and some are false, untill they be 
able to shew foorth before your eies one matter of truth, you 
may replie upon them with this distinction ; 
to wit : visions tried are false 
visions, undecided and 
untried are 
true./ 
H. Card. lib. 
de var. rer. 
15. ca. 92. 
Pope Ccele- 
stinus couse- 
ned of his 
popedome 
by pope Be- 
lli face. 
465- 
Visions di- 
stinguished

--- PAGE 490 ---
392 IS. Booke. 
The discoverie 
336. 
The xli. Chapter. 
H. Card. lib. 
di szibtili- 
tat. i8. 
Idem, ibid. 
Of Win- 
chester 
noise. 
Of the noise or sound of eccho, of one that narrowlie escaped 
drowning thereby, &^c. 
LAS ! how manie naturall things are there so strange, as 
to manie seeme miraculous ; and how manie counterfet 
matters are there, that to the simple seeme yet more 
wonderfull ? Cardane telleth of one Co}nensis,viho comming 
late to a rivers side, not knowing where to passe over, cried out 
alowd for some bodie to shew him the foord : who hearing an eccho 
to answer according to his last word, supposing it to be a man that 
answered him and informed him of the waie, he passed through the 
river, even there where was a deepe whirlepoole, so as he hardlie 
escaped with his life ; and told his freends, that the divell had almost 
persuaded him to drowne himselfe. And in some places these noises 
of eccho are farre more strange than other, speciallie at Ticitiutn in 
Italte, in the great hall, where it rendereth sundrie and manifold 
noises or voices, which seeme to end so lamentablie, as it were a man 
that laie a dieng ; so as few can be persuaded that it is the eccho, but 
a spirit that answereth. 
The noise at Winchester was said to be a verie miracle, and much 
wondering was there at it, about the yeare 1569. though indeed a 
meere naturall noise ingendered of the wind, the concavitie of 
the place, and other instrumental! matters helping the sound to 
seeme strange to the hearers ; speciallie to such as would adde new 
reports to the augmentation of the woonder. / 
466. 
The xlii. Chapter. 
Of Theurgie, with a confutation thereof a letter sent to me 
concerning these matters. 
HERE is yet another art professed by these cousening 
conjurors, which some fond divines affirme to be more 
honest and lawfuU than necromancie, which is called 
Theurgie ; wherein they worke by good angels. How- 
beit, their ceremonies are altogether papistical! and superstitious, 
consisting in cleanlines partlie of the mind, partlie of the bodie, and 
partlie of things about and belonging to the bodie ; as in the skinne, 
in the apparell, in the house, in the vessel! and houshold stuffe, in

--- PAGE 491 ---
of Witchcraft. chap,42. 393 
oblations and sacrifices ; the cleanlines whereof, they saie, dooth 
dispose men to the contemplation of heavenlie things. They cite 
these words of Esaie for their authoritie ; to wit : Wash your selves 
and be cleane, &c. In so much as I have knowne diverse supersti- 
tious persons of good account, which usuallie washed all their 
apparell upon conceits ridiculouslie. For uncleanlinesse (they say) 
corrupteth the aire, infecteth man, and chaseth awaie cleane/ spirits. 337. 
Hereunto belongeth the art of Almadel, the art of Paule, the art Appen- 
of Revelations, and the art Notarie. But (as Agrippa saith) the to the sup- 
more divine these arts seeme to the ignorant, the more damnable art'" 
they be. But their false assertions, their presumptions to worke ofTheur- 
miracles, their characters, their strange names, their diffuse phrases, 
their counterfet holines, their popish ceremonies, their foolish 
words mingled with impietie, their barbarous and unlearned 
order of construction, their shameles practises, their paltrie stuffe, 
their secret dealing, their beggerlie life, their bargaining with 
fooles, their cousening of the simple, their scope and drift for 
monie dooth bewraie all their art to be counterfet cousenage. 
And the more throughlie to satisfie you herein, I thought good in 
this place to insert a letter, upon occasion sent unto me, by one 
which at this present time lieth as a prisoner condemned for this 
verie matter in the kings bench, and reprived by hir majesties mer/cie, 46^. 
through the good mediation of a most noble and vertuous personage, 
whose honorable and godlie disposition at this time I will forbeare to 
commend as I ought. The person truelie that wrote this letter seem- 
eth unto me a good bodie, well reformed, and penitent, not expecting 
anie gaines at my hands, but rather fearing to speake that which he 
knoweth further in this matter, least displeasure might ensue and 
follow. 
The copie of a letter sent unto me R. S. by T. E. 
Maister of art, and practiser both of physicke, and also 
in titnes past, of certeine vaine sciences; now 
condemned to die for the same : wherein he 
openeth the truth touching these deceits.* 
AISTER R. SCOT,\ according to your request, I have 
drawne out certeine abuses worth the noting, touching the 
[* Lines i, 3, 5 
Rom. J, 4 Ital.] 
Marke the 
summe and 
scope of 
worke you have in hand j things which I my selfe have ''^'^ 
scene within these xxvi. yeares, among those which were '^^ ^'^'^ '^"'"^ 
counted famojis and skilfull in those sciences. 
Atid bicatise the whole 
3 E 
in Rom.J

--- PAGE 492 ---
394 i5.Bo<,ke. The discoverie 
discourse cannot be set downe, without nominating certeine persons, of 
whom some are dead some living, whose freends remaine yet of 
great credit : in respect therof I knowing that mine etiifiiies doo 
alreadie in nianber exceed my freends j I have considered with my 
selfe, that it is better for me to staie my hand, than to com?7iit that to 
the world, which may increase my miserie more tha7i rcleeve the 
same. Notwithstanditig, bicause I ain noted above a great manie 
others to have had some dealings in those vaine arts and wicked 
practises J I am therefore to signifie unto you, and I speake it in the 
presence of God, that atnotig all those famous and noted practisers, 
that I have beene conversa7it wit hall these xxvi. yeares, I could 7iever 
468. see a/lie 7natter of t7-uth to bej doo/te /« those wicked sciences, but 
07ielie 7/ieere couse7ii7igs a7id illusio7is. A7id they, whome I thought 
to be 7/iost skilfull therein, sought to see S077ie things at 77iy ha/ids, 
who had spent 77iy time a dozen or fourtee7i years, to 77iy great losse 
338. a9td hi7idera7ice, a7id cotddj never at anie ti7ne see anie one truth, or 
sparkle of truth therein. Yet at this present I stand worthilie co7i- 
de7/t7ted for the sa77ie j for that, co7itrarie to my pri7ices lawes, a7id 
the lawe of God, a7id also to 7/ii7ie owne C07iscie7ice, I did spe7id 77iy 
time in such vai7te a7id wicked studies and practises : being 7nade a7id 
re77iai7iing a spectacle for all others to receive war7iing by. The Lord 
grant I may be the last {I speake it fro7/i 7ny hart) and I wish it, 7iot 
onlie i7i 7ny native cotltrie, but also throtigh the whole face of the 
earth, speciallie a77to7tg Christians. For 77iine ow7te part I Ia77ie7tt 
my time lost, &^ have repe7ited 77ie five yeares past : at which time I 
s. John sawe a booke, writte7i in the old Saxo7i toong, by 07ie Sir fohn Mal- 
boo'ke°dT-^ bor7ie a divi7ie of Oxe7iford, three Jiundred yeares past j wherein he 
tecting the opencth all the illusio7is &^ i7ive7itions of those arts and scie7ices : a . 
devises of 
conjuratis, tiling 77iost wortJiie the 7ioti7ig. I left the booke with the parso7i of 
Slangha77i in Sussex, where if you send for it in 77iy 7ia77ie, you 7nay 
have it. You shall thi7ike your labour well bestowed, and it shall 
greatlie further the good e7iterprise you have i7i ha7id: a7id there shall 
you see the whole science throughlie discussed, a7id all their illusions 
and couse7iages deciphered at large. Thus cravi7ig pardon at your 
ha7ids for that I pro7/iised you, bei7ig verie fearefull, doubtfull, and 
loth to set 7ny ha7td or na77ie tmder a7iy thing that 7nay be offensive to 
the world, or hurtfull to 77iy selfe, C07isideri7ig my case, except I had 
the better warra7it f 7-07/1 my L. of Leicester, who is 77iy ve7-ie good 
Lord, and by whoi7ie 7iext 7mder God (Mr Majestic 0}-ielie excepted) I 
have bee7te p7-eserved ; a7id therefore loth to doo any thijig that 7nay 
46g. offend his Lordships eares.j A7id so L leave your Worship to the 
Lords keepi7ig, who bring you and all your actio7is to good end and 
purpose, to Gods glorie, a7id to the profit of all Christians. Fro/7i

--- PAGE 493 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 42. 
395 
the bench this 8. of March, 1582. Your Worships poore and desolate 
friend and servant, T. E. 
I sent for this booke of purpose, to the parson of Slangham, and 
procured his best friends, men of great worship and credit, to deale 
with him, that I might borrowe it for a time. But such is his folHe 
and superstition, that although he confessed he had it ; yet he would 
not lend it : albeit a friend of mine, being knight of the shire would 
have given his word for the restitution of the same safe and sound. 
The conclusion therefore shall be this, whatsoever heeretofore hath ^j^^j,^"']'"'' 
gone for currant, touching all these fallible arts, whereof hitherto I sion. 
have written in ample sort, be now counted counterfet, and therefore 
not to be allowed no not by common sense, much lesse by reason, 
which should sift such cloked and pretended practises, turning them 
out of their rags and patched clowts, that they may appeere dis- 
covered, and shew themselves in their nakednesse. Which will be 
the end of everie secret intent, privie purpose, hidden practise, and 
close devise, have they never such shrowds and shelters for the time: 
and be they with never so much cautelousnesse and subtill circum- 
spection clouded and shadowed, yet will they at length be manifestlie 
detected by the light, according to that old rimed verse :/ 
Quicqtcid nix celat, solis calor om7ie revelai : 339. 
What thinf; soever snowe dooth hide, 
Heat of the sunne dooth make it spide. 
A ndrceas 
Gartner us 
Maricerfion- 
tamis. Eng. 
by Ab. Fie. 
And according to the verdict of Christ, the true Nazarite, who never 
told untruth, but who is the substance and groundworke of 
truth it selfe, saieng ; Nihil est tarn occultum quod 
non sit detegendum, Nothing is 
so secret, but it shall 
be knowne and 
revealed./ 
Matt. 10, 26. 
Mark 4 22. 
Luke. 8, 17. 
*And. 12, 2, 
[* =and]

