he benefit of the braine, and 
so of the sense and understanding of the mind. And from some it 
taketh awaie life, & that is more common than the other. These be 
called Philtra, or Pocula amatoria, or Venenosa poctila, or Hippo- 
manes; which bad and blind physicians rather practise, than witches 
or conjurers, &c. But of what value these babies are, towards the 
end why they are provided, may appeere by the opinions of poets 
themselves, from whence was derived the estimation of that stuffe.

--- PAGE 195 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 6. 
Ovid. lib. 3. 
de arte a- 
mandi. 
91. 
132. 
Englished by 
Abraham 
Fleming. 
And first you shall heare what Ovid saith, who wrote of the verie art 
of love, and that so cunninglie and feelinglie, that he is reputed the 
speciall doctor in that science : 
Fallihir .^Emonias si quis decurrit ad artes, 
Ddtqj quod d teneri fronte revellit equi. 
Non facient let vivat amor Medeides kerbs,! 
Mistdq; cum magicis mersa venena sonis. 
Phasias ^sonidem, Circe tenuis set Ulyssem, 
Si modb servari carmine posset amor : 
Nec data profiterint pallentia philtra puellis, 
Philtra nocent animis, vimq; furoris habent.j 
Who so dooth run to Hcetnon arts, 
I dub him for a dolt, 
And giveth that which he dooth plucke 
from forhead of a colt : 
Medeas herbs will not procure 
that love shall lasting live, 
Nor steeped poison mixed with ma- 
gicke charms the same can give. 
The witch Medea had full fast 
held Jason for hir owne, 
So had the grand witch Circe too 
Ulysses, if alone 
With charms mainteind kept might be 
the love of twaine in one. 
No slibbersawces given to maids, 
to }nake them pale and wan, 
Will helpe : such slibbersawces inarre 
the minds of maid and man, 
And have in them a furious force 
ofphrensie now and than. 
Viderit Aemonice si quis inala pabula terrce, 
Et magicas artes posse fuvare putat. 
If any thinke that evill herbs Ab. Fleming. 
in Hcemon land which be, 
Or witchcraft able is to helpe, 
let him tnake proofe and see. 
These verses precedent doo shew, that Ovid knew that those/ 
beggerlie sorceries might rather kill one, or make him starke mad, i2j 
than doo him good towards the atteinement of his pleasure or love; 
O 
Philtra, 
slibbersa^'- 
ces to pro- 
cure love. 
Ovid. lib. de 
remedio a- 
moris, i.

--- PAGE 196 ---
1
98 
6. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Englished by 
A brahii m 
Fleming. 
and therefore he giveth this counsell to them that are amorous in 
such hot maner, that either they must enjoy their love, or else needs 
die; saieng: 
Sit procul oinne nefas, nt ameris avtabilis esto : 
Farre off be all unlawfull meajtes 
thou amiable bee, 
Loving J meane, that she with love 
may qitite the love of thee. \ 
92. 
Hieronym. 
in Ruff. 
Plin. lib. 25. 
cap. 3. Joseph 
lib. II. deju- 
de^ofuvi anti- 
quit. 
Aristot. lib. 
8. de natiira 
animal, 
cap. 24. 
Jo. Wier. 
de venef. 
cap. 40. 
Toies to 
mocke 
apes. 
124. 
The seventh Chapter. 
// is proved by rnore credible writers, that love cups rather ingender 
death throtigh venome, than love by art : and with what toies 
they destroie cattell, and procure love. 
UT bicause there is no hold nor trust to these poets, who 
saie and unsaie, dalliengwith these causes; so as indeed 
the wise may perceive they have them in derision : let 
us see what other graver authors speake hereof. Euse- 
bius CcEsariensis writeth, that the poet Lucretius was killed with one 
of those lovers poisoned cups. Hierome reporteth that one Livia 
herewith killed hir husband, whome she too much hated ; and 
Liicilla killed hirs, whome she too much loved. Calisthenes killed 
Lucius Lticulhis the emperor with a love pot, as Plutarch and 
Cornelius Nepos saie. Plinie & Josephus report, that Ccesonia killed 
hir husband Caligula Amatorio poculo with a lovers cup, which was 
indeed starke poison. Aristotle saith, that all which is beleeved 
touching the efficacie of these matters, is lies and old wives tales. He 
that will read more arguments and histories concerning these poisons, 
let him looke in J. Wier De Veneficiis. / 
The toies, which are said to procure love, and are exhibited in their 
poison looving cups, are these: the haire growing in the nethermost 
part of a woolves taile, a woolves yard, a little fish called Remora, the 
braine of a cat, of a newt, or of a lizzard: the bone of agreene frog, the 
flesh thereof being consumed with pismers or ants; the left bone 
whereof ingendereth (as they saie) love; the bone on the right side, 
hate. Also it is said, that a frogs bones, the flesh being eaten 
off round about with ants, whereof some will swim, and some will 
sinke: those that sinke, being hanged up in a white linnen cloth, 
ingender love, but if a man be touched therewith, hate is bred thereby. 
Another experiment is thereof, with yoong swalowes, whereof one 
brood or nest being taken and buried in a crocke under the ground,

--- PAGE 197 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. s. 99 
till they be starved up; they that be found open mouthed, serve to 
engender love; they whose mouthes are shut, serve to procure hate. 
Besides these, manie other follies there be to this purpose proposed 
to the simple ; as namelie, the garments of the dead, candels that 
burne before a dead corps, and needels wherwith dead bodies are 
sowne or sockt into their sheetes: and diverse other things, which for 
the reverence of the reader, and in respect of the uncleane speach to 
be used in the description thereof, I omit; which (if you read Diosco- DioscoHd.de 
rides, or diverse other learned physicians) you maie see at large. In dicin. 
the meane while, he that desireth to see more experiments concerning 
this matter, let him read Leonardus Vainis de fascino, now this l. Vairusde 
present yeare 1583. newlie published ; wherein (with an incestuous {."Jp'^^^p^pi 
mouth) he affirmeth directlie, that Christ and his apostles were finem. 
Venefici ; verie fondlie prosecuting that argument, and with as much 
popish follie as may be; labouring to proove it lawfull to charme and 
inchant vermine, &c. / / 
■ 
The eight Chapter, 125. 93. 
John Bodin triutnphing against John Wier is overtaken with Jalse 
Greeke false interpretation thereof. 
ONSIEUR BODIN triumpheth over doctor Wier herein, j, Bodin. 
pronouncing a heavie sentence upon him ; bicause he 
referreth this word to poison. But he reigneth or rather 
rideth over him, much more for speaking false Greeke ; 
affirming that he calleth Veneficos ^apfiuKevav^, which is as true as 
the rest of his reports and fables of witches miracles conteined in 
his bookes of divelish devises. For in truth he hath no such word, 
but saith they are called ^ap^uKeven, whereas he should have said 
^ap/iaKei9, the true accent being omitted, and ev being interposed, 
which should have beene left out. Which is nothing to the substance 
of the matter, but must needs be the Printers fault. 
But Bodin reasoneth in this wise, iPapfiuKei'} is sometimes put 
for Magos or PrcBstigiatores : Ergo in the translation of the Septii- 
aginta, it is so to be taken. Wherein he manifesteth his bad 
Logicke, more than the others ill Greeke. For it is well knowne to 
the learned in this toong, that the usuall and proper signification of 
this word, with all his derivations and compounds doo signifie 
Veneficos, Poisoners by medicine. Which when it is most usuall and 
proper, why should the translators take it in a signification lesse 
usuall, and nothing proper. Thus therefore he reasoneth and con- 
cludeth with his new found Logicke, and old fond Greeke ; Some-

--- PAGE 198 ---
6. Booke. 
TJie discoverie 
times it signifieth so, though unproperlie, or rather metaphoricalhe; 
Ergo in that place it is so to be taken, when another fitter word 
might have beene used. Which argument being vaine, agreeth well 
with his other vaine actions. The Septuaginta had beene verie desti- 
tute of words, if no proper word could have beene found for this 
purpose. But where they have occasion to speake of witchcraft in 
their translations, they use Magian, Maggagian, &c : and 
therfore belike they see some difference betwixt 
them and the other, and knew some 
cause that mooved them to use 
the word ^ap/naKei'a, 
Veneficiuin. / /

--- PAGE 199 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. I. 
lOI 
Tf The seveitth Booke. 
126. 94. 
The first Chapter. 
Of the Hebrue word Ob, what it signifieth where it is found, of 
Pythonisses called Ventriloquce, who they be, and what their 
practises are, experience and examples thereof shewed. 
HIS word Ob, is translated Pytho, or Pythonicus spiritus : 
Deutre. i8. Isaie. 19. 1. Sam. 28. 2. Reg. 23. &c : som- 
time, though unproperlie, Magus as 2. Sam. 33. But Ob 
signifieth most properlie a bottle, and is used in this place, 
bicausethe/'j//^i'«/j'/j' spake hollowe ; as in thebottome of their bellies, 
whereby they are aptlie in Latine called Ventriloqtii : of which sort was 
Elizabeth Barton, the holie maid of Kent, &c. These are such as 
take upon them to give oracles, to tell where things lost are become, 
and finallie to appeach others of mischeefs, which they themselves 
most commonlie have brought to passe : whereby many times they 
overthrowe the good fame of honest women, and of such others of 
their neighbors, with whome they are displeased. For triall hereof, 
letting passe a hundred cousenages that I could recite at this time, 
I will begin with a true storie of a wench, practising hir diabolicall 
witchcraft, and ventriloquie An. 1574. at Westwell in Kent, within six 
miles where I dwell, taken and noted by twoo ministers and preachers 
of Gods word, foure substantial! yeomen, and three women of good 
fame & reputation, whose names are after written./ 
Mildred, the base daughter of Alice Norrington, and now servant 
to William Spo7ier of Westwell in the countie of Kent, being of the 
age of seventeene yeares, was possessed with sathan in the night and 
daie aforesaid. About two of the clocke in the afternoone of the 
same day, there came to the same Sponers house Roger Newman 
minister of Westwell, fohn Brainford minister of Kenington, with 
others, whose names are underwritten, who made their praiers unto 
God, to assist them in that needfull case ; and then commanded 
sathan in the name of the eternall God, and of his sonne Jesus 
Christ, to speake with such a voice as they might understand, and to 
declare from whence he came. But he would not speake, but rored 
and cried mightilie. And though we did command him manie 
times, in the name of God, and of his sonne Jesus Christ, and in his 
The holie 
maid of 
Kent a ven- 
triloqua. 
An. Dorai. j 
1574. 
Octob. 13. 
Confer 
this storie 
with the 
woman of 
Endor, 
I. Sam. 28. 
and see 
whether 
the same 
might not 
be accom- 
plished by 
this devise.

--- PAGE 200 ---
102 7. Booke. 
The discoverie 
mightie power to speake ; yet he would not : untill he had gon 
through all his delaies, as roring, crieng, striving, and gnashing of 
teeth ; and otherwhile with mowing, and other terrible countenances, 
and was so strong in the maid, that foure men could scarse hold hir 
downe. And this continued by the space almost of two houres. So 
sometimes we charged him earnestlie to speake ; and againe praieng 
unto GOD that he would assist us, at the last he spake, but verie 
strangelie ; and that was thus ; He comes, he comes : and that 
oftentimes he repeated ; and He goes, he goes. And then we/ 
95. charged him to tell us who sent him. And he said ; I laie in her waie 
like a log, and I made hir runne like fier, but I could not hurt hir. 
And whie so, said we ? Bicause God kept hir, said he. When 
earnest thou to her, said we ? To night in her bed, said he. Then 
we charged him as before, to tell what he was, and who sent him, 
and what his name was. At the first he said. The divell, the divell. 
Then we charged him as before. Then he rored and cried as before, 
and spake terrible words ; I will kill hir, I will kill hir ; I will teare 
hir in peeces, I will teare hir in peeces. We said. Thou shalt not hurt 
hir. He said, I will kill you all. We said, Thou shalt hurt none of 
us all. Then we charged him as before. Then he said. You will 
give me no rest. Wee said. Thou shalt have none here, for thou 
must have no rest within the servants of God : but tell us in the 
name of God what thou art, and who sent thee. Then he said he 
would teare hir in peeces. We said. Thou shalt not hurt hir. Then/ 
128. he said againe he would kill us all. We said againe, Thou shalt hurt 
none of us all, for we are the servants of God. And we charged him 
as before. And he said againe. Will you give me no rest? We said, 
Thou shalt have none here, neither shalt thou rest in hir, for thou 
hast no right in hir, sith Jesus Christ hath redeemed hir with his 
bloud, and she belongeth to him ; and therefore tell us thy name, 
and who sent thee ? He said his name was sathan. We said. Who 
sent thee ? He said. Old Alice, old Alice. Which old Alice, said we ? 
Old Alice, said he. Where dwelleth she, said we? In Westwell 
streete, said he. We said, How long hast thou beene with hir? 
These twentie yeares, said he. We asked him where she did keepe 
him? In two bottels, said he. Where be they, said we? In the 
backside of hir house, said he. In what place, said we ? Under the 
wall, said he. Where is the other? In Kenington. In what place, 
said we? In the ground, said he. Then we asked him, what she did 
give him. He said, hir will, hir will. What did shee bid thee doo, 
said we ? He said. Kill hir maid. Wherefore did she bid thee kill 
hir, said we ? Bicause she did not love hir, said he. We said ; How 
long is it ago, since she sent thee to hir ? More than a yeare, said he.

--- PAGE 201 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. I. 
Where was that, said we ? At hir masters, said he. Which masters, 
said we ? At hir master Brahifords at Kenington, said he. How oft 
wert thou there, said we ? Manie times, said he. Where first, said 
we 
In the garden, said he : Where the second time .'' In the hall : 
Where the third time } In hir bed : Where the fourth time.-' In the 
field : Where the fift time? In the court : Where the sixt time? In 
the water, where I cast hir into the mote : Where the seventh time. 
In hir bed. We asked him againe, where else ? He said, in 
Westwell. Where there, said we ? In the vicarige, said he. Where 
there? In the loft. How camest thou to hir, said we? In the like- 
nesse of two birds, said he. Who sent thee to that place, said we? Old 
Alice, sa.\Aht. What other spirits were with thee there, said we? My 
servant, said he. What is his name, said we ? He said, little divell. 
What is thy name, said we ? Sathan, said he. What dooth o\6. Alice 
call thee, said we? Partener, said he. What dooth she give thee, said 
we? Hir will, said he. How manie hast thou killed for hir, said we? 
Three, said he. Who are they, said we ? A man and his child, said/ 
he. What were their names, said we ? The childs name was/ 96. [Mispr. 99 ] 
Edward, said he : what more than Edward, said we ? Edward Ager, I2g. 
said he. What was the mans name, said we ? Richard, said he. 
What more, said we ? Richard Ager, said he. Where dwelt the man 
and the child, said we? At Dig at Dig, said he. This Richard 
Ager of Dig, was a Gentleman of xl. pounds land by the yeare, a 
verie honest man, but would often sale he was bewitched, and 
languished long before he died. Whom else hast thou killed for hir, 
said we ? Woltons wife said he. Where did she dwell ? In West- 
well said he. What else hast thou doone for hir said we ? What 
she would have me, said he. What is that said we ? To fetch 
hir meat, drinke, and come, said he. Where hadst thou it, said 
we ? In everie house, said he. Name the houses, said we ? 
At Petmans, at Farmes, at Millens, at Fullers, and in everie house. 
After this we commanded sathan in the name of Jesus Christ to 
depart from hir, and never to trouble hir anie more, nor anie man 
else. Then he said he would go, he would go : but he went not. 
Then we commanded him as before with some more words. Then 
he said, I go, I go; and so he departed. Then said the maid. He is 
gone, Lord have mercie upon me, for he would have killed me. And 
then we kneeled downe and gave God thanks with the maiden; 
praieng that God would keepe hir from sathans power, and assist hir 
with his grace. And noting this in a peece of paper, we departed. 
Sathans voice did differ much from the maids voice, and all that he 
spake, was in his owne name. Subscribed thus :

--- PAGE 202 ---
1 04 7- Booke. 
The discoverie 
[* Rom.] 
Witnesses to this, that heard 
sawe this whole matter, as followeth . 
and^ 
I?o^er Newman, vi- 
car of Westwell. 
Joh}i Brainford, vi- 
car of Kettnington. 
Thomas Tailor. 
^ Henrie Tailors wife. 
^ fohn Tailor. 
Thomas French- 
boms wife. 
Williafn Spooner. 
folm Frenchborne, 
and his wife. I 
/?0 
Matt. 24, 44. 
2. Thes. 2, 9. 97. 
The ventri- 
loqua of 
Westwell 
discovered. 
The second Chapter. 
How the lewd practise of the Pythonist of Westwell came to light, 
and by who7ne she was examined ; and that all hir diabolicall 
speach was but veiitriloquie and plaine cousenage, which is 
prooved by hir owne confession . 
|T is written, that in the latter daies there shalbe shewed 
strange illusions, &c: in so much as (if it were possible) 
the verie elect shal/be deceived: howbeit, S. Paule saith, 
they shalbe lieng and false woonders. Neverlhelesse, 
this sentence, and such like, have beene often laid in my dish, and are 
urged by diverse writers, to approve the miraculous working of witches, 
whereof I will treat more largelie in another place. Howbeit, by the 
waie I must confesse, that I take that sentence to be spoken of Anti- 
christ, to wit: the pope, who miraculouslie, contrarie to nature, 
philosophie, and all divinitie, being of birth and calling base, in 
learning grosse; in valure, beautie, or activitie most commonlie a verie 
lubber, hath placed himselfe in the most loftie and delicate seate, 
putting almost all christian princes heads, not onelie under his girdle, 
but under his foote, &c. 
Surelie, the tragedie of this Pythonist is not inferior to a thousand 
stories, which will hardlie be blotted out of the memorie and credit 
either of the common people, or else of the learned. How hardlie 
will this storie suffer discredit, having testimonie of such authoritie .'' 
How could mother Alice escape condemnation and hanging, being 
arreigned upon this evidence ; when a poore woman hath beene cast 
away, upon a cousening oracle, or rather a false lie, devised by Feats 
the juggler, through the malicious instigation of some of hir adver- 
saries 1 
But how cunninglie soever this last cited certificat be penned, or 
what shew soever it carrieth of truth and plaine dealing, there may be 
found conteined therein matter enough to detect the cousening 
knaverie therof. And yet diverse have been deepelie deceived there-

--- PAGE 203 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 2. 
with, and can hardlie be removed from the cre/dit thereof, and without ijt. 
great disdaine cannot endure to heare the reproofe thereof And 
know you this by the waie, that heretofore Robin goodfellow, and 
Hob gobblin were as terrible, and also as credible to the people, as 
hags and witches be now: and in time to come, a witch will be as 
much derided and contemned, and as plainlie perceived, as the 
illusion and knaverie of Robin goodfellow. And in truth, they that 
mainteine walking spirits, with their transformation, &c: have no 
reason to denie Robin goodfellow, upon whom there hath gone as 
manie and as credible tales, as upon witches ; saving that it hath not 
pleased the translators of the Bible, to call spirits by the name of 
Robin goodfellow, as they have termed divinors, soothsaiers, poi- 
soners, and couseners by the name of witches. 
But to make short worke with the confutation of this bastardlie 
queanes enterprise, & cousenage ; you shall understand, that upon 
the brute of hir divinitie and miraculous transes, she was convented 
before M. Thomas Wotton of Bocton Malherbe, a man of great 
worship and wisedome, and for deciding and ordering of matters in 
this commonwealth, of rare and singular dexteritie; through whose 
discreet handling of the matter, with the assistance & aid of M. 
George Darrell esquire, being also a right good and discreet Justice of The Pytho- 
the same limit, the fraud was found, the coosenage confessed, and she well eon- 
received condigne punishment. Neither was hir confession woone, hifowne' 
according to the forme of the Spanish inquisition ; to wit, through confession, 
extremitie of tortures, nor yet by guile or flatterie, nor by presump- 
tions; but through wise and perfect triall of everie circumstance the 
illusion was manifestlie disclosed: not so (I say) as / witches are 98. 
commonlie convinced and condemned ; to wit, through malicious 
accusations, by ghesses, presumptions, and extorted confessions, 
contrarie to sense and possibilitie, and for such actions as they can 
shew no triall nor example before the wise, either by direct or indirect 
meanes; but after due triall she shewed hir feats, illusions, and 
transes, with the residue of all hir miraculous works, in the pre- 
sence of divers gentlemen and gentlewomen of great worship 
and credit, at Bocton Malherbe, in the house of the 
aforesaid M. Wotton. Now compare this 
wench with the witch of Endor, & 
you shall see that both the 
cousenages may be 
doone by one 
art./

--- PAGE 204 ---
io6 
7. Booke. 
The discoverie 
The third Chapter. 
Bodins stuffe concerning the Pythonist of Endor, with a true 
storie of a counterfeit Dutchman. 
Brigs., and Rachell Pinder of London did, till the miracles were 
detected, and they set to open penance. Others he citeth of that 
sort, the which were bound by divels with garters, or some such like 
stuffe to posts, &c: with knots that could not be undone, which is an 
Aegyptians juggling or cousening feat. And of such foolish lies 
joined with bawdie tales, his whole booke consisteth: wherein I 
warrant you there are no fewer than twoo hundreth fables, and as 
manie impossibilities. And as these two wenches, with the maiden 
of Westwell, were detected of cousenage; so likewise a Dutchman at 
Maidstone long after he had accomplished such knaveries, to the 
astonishment of a great number of good men, was revealed to be a 
cousening knave; although his miracles were imprinted and published 
at London: anno 1572. with this title before the booke, as followeth. 
^ A verie wonderfull and strange mi- 
racle of God, shewed upon a Dutchtnan of the age of 
23. yeares, which was possessed of ten di- 
vels, and was by Gods mightie providence dis- 
possessed of them againe, the 27, 
of fanuarie last past, 1572. 
NTO this the Maior of Maidstone, with diverse of his brethren 
\J subscribed, chieflieby the persuasion/ oi Nicasius Vander Schuere, 
99. the mi/nister of the Dutch church there, fohn Stikelbow, whome (as 
it is there said) God made the instrument to cast out the divels, and 
foure other credible persons of the Dutch church. The historie is so 
strange, & so cunninglie performed, that had not his knaverie after- 
wards brought him into suspicion, he should have gone awaie unsus- 
pected of this fraud. A great manie other such miracles have beene 
latelie printed, whereof diverse have beene bevvraied: all the residue 
doubtles, if triall had beene made, would have beene found like unto 
these. But some are more finelie handled than othersome. Some 
J. Bod in. lib. 
de dipmon.%. 
cap. J. 
PON the like tales dooth Bodin build his doctrine, calling 
them Atheists that will not beleeve him, adding to this 
kind of witchcraft, the miraculous works of diverse 
maidens, that would spue pins, clowts, &c: as one Agnes

