an idolater ; as also he 
that alloweth and commendeth creeping to the crosse, and such like 
idolatrous actions, although he bend not his corporall knees. 
In like manner I say, he that attributeth to a witch, such divine 
power, as dulie and onelie apperteineth unto GOD (which all witch- 
mongers doo) is in hart a blasphemer, an idolater, and full of grosse 
impietie, although he neither go nor send to hir for assistance. / 
John. 5 : 6. 
Mark. 5. 34. 
To go to witches, 
&c. is idolatrie. 
c

--- PAGE 108 ---
10 
Chap. 6. 
TJie discoverie 
The sixt Chapter. 
^3- 
Aristot. de 
anima. lib. 2 , 
Acts. g. 
Why shuld not 
the divell be as 
readie to helpe a 
A ft(7-iher co7ifutation of witches miraculous and omnipotent 
power, by invincible reasons and authorities, with dissuasions 
from such fond credulitie. 
F witches could doo anie such miraculous things, as these 
and other which are imputed to them, they might doo 
them againe and againe, at anie time or place, or at 
anie mans desire : for the divell is as strong at one 
time as at another, as busie by dale as by night, and readie enough 
to doo all mischeefe, and careth not whom he abuseth. And 
in so much as it is confessed, by the most part of witchmoongers 
themselves, that he knoweth not the cogitation of mans heart, he 
should (me thinks) sometimes appeere / unto honest and credible 
persons, in such grosse and corporall forme, as it is said he dooth 
unto witches : which you shall never heare to be justified by one 
sufficient witnesse. For the divell indeed entreth into the mind, and 
that waie seeketh mans confusion. 
The art alwaies presupposeth the power ; so as, if they sale they 
can doo this or that, they must shew how and by what meanes they 
doo it; as neither the witches, nor the witchmoongers are able to doo. 
For to everie action is required the facultie and abilitie of the agent or 
dooer; the aptnes of the patient or subject; and a convenient and 
possible application. Now the witches are mortall, and their power 
dependeth upon the analogie and consonancie of their minds and 
bodies ; but with their minds they can but will and understand ; and 
with their bodies they can doo no more, but as the bounds and ends 
of terrene sense will suffer : and therefore their power extendeth not 
to doo such miracles, as surmounteth their owne sense, and the 
understanding of others which are wiser than they ; so as here 
wanteth the vertue and power of the efficient. And in reason, there 
can be no more vertue in the thing caused, than in the cause, or that 
which proceedeth of or from the benefit of the cause. And we see, 
that ignorant and impotent women, or witches, are the causes of 
incantations and charmes ; wherein we shall perceive there is none 
effect, if we will credit our owne experience and sense unabused, the 
rules of philosophic, or the word of God. For alas ! What an unapt 
instrument is a toothles, old, impotent, and unweldie woman to flie in 
the aier ? Truelie, the divell little needs such instruments to bring his 
purposes to passe. 
It is strange, that we should suppose, that such persons can worke 
such feates: and it is more strange, that we will imagine that to be

--- PAGE 109 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 7. 
possible to be doone by a witch, which to nature and sense is impos- Oieefe^reaiHe as 
sible ; speciallie when our neighbours life dependeth upon our 
credulitie therein ; and when we may see the defect of abilitie, which 
alwaies is an impediment both to the act, and also to the presumption 
thereof. And bicause there is nothing possible in lawe, that in nature l. muitum.i.si 
is impossible ; therefore the judge dooth not attend or regard what <i^^^>^ °-iteri,vei 
the accused man saith ; or yet would/ doo : but what is prooved to 10. 
have beene committed, and na/turallie falleth in mans power and 14. 
will to doo. For the lawe saith, that To will a thing unpossible, is a 
signe of a mad man, or of a foole, upon whom no sentence or judge- 
ment taketh hold. Furthermore, what Jurie will condemne, or what 
Judge will give sentence or judgement against one for killing a man 
at Berwicke ; when they themselves, and manie other sawe that man 
at London, that verie dale, wherein the murther was committed ; yea 
though the partie confesse himself guiltie therein, and twentie wit- 
nesses depose the same ? But in this case also I sale the judge is not 
to weigh their testimonie, which is weakened by lawe ; and the judges 
authoritie is to supplie the imperfection of the case, and to mainteine 
the right and equitie of the same. 
Seeing therefore that some other things might naturallie be the 
occasion and cause of such calamities as witches are supposed to 
bring ; let not us that professe the Gospell and knowledge of Christ, 
be bewitched to beleeve that they doo such things, as are in nature im- 
possible, and in sense and reason incredible. If they sale it is doone An objection 
through the divels helpe, who can work miracles ; whie doo not theeves 
bring their busines to passe miraculouslie, with whom the divell is as 
conversant as with the other ? Such mischeefes as are imputed to 
witches, happen where no witches are ; yea and continue when witches 
are hanged and burnt : whie then should we attribute such effect to that 
cause, which being taken awaie, happeneth neverthelesse ? 
The seventh Chapter. 
By what meanes the name of witches becommeth so famous, and 
how diverslie people be opitiioned concerning them and their 
actions. 
|URELIE the naturall power of man or woman cannot 
be so inlarged, as to doo anie thing beyond the power 
and vertue given and ingraffed by God. But it is 
 the will and mind of man, which is vitiated and de- 
praved by the divell : neither dooth God permit anie more, ^eTelsed 
than that which the naturall order appointed by / him dooth yj. 
require. Which naturall order is nothing else, but the ordinarie 
power of God, powred into everie creature, according to his state

--- PAGE 110 ---
12 
Chap. 8. 
The discoverie 
The opinions of 
people concern- 
ing witchcraft 
are diverse and 
inconstant. 
11. 
Card, de var. 
rerum. lib. 15. 
cap. go. 
and condition. But hereof more shall be said in the title of witches 
confessions. Howbeit you shall understand, that few or none are 
throughlie persuaded, resolved, or satisfied, that witches can indeed 
accomplish all these impossibilities : but some one is bewitched in 
one point, and some is coosened in another, untill in fine, all these 
impossibilities, and manie mo, are by severall persons affirmed to be 
true. 
And this I have also noted, that when anie one is coosened with a 
coosening toie of witchcraft, and maketh report thereof accordinglie 
verifieng a matter most impossible and false as it were upon his owne 
knowledge, as being overtaken with some kind of illusion or other 
(which illusions are right inchantments) even the selfe-same man will 
deride the / like lie proceeding out of another mans mouth, as a 
fabulous matter unworthie of credit. It is also to be woondered, how 
men (that have scene some part of witches coosenages detected, and 
see also therein the impossibilitie of their owne presumptions, & 
the follie and falsehood of the witches confessions) will not suspect, 
but remaine unsatisfied, or rather obstinatelie defend the residue of 
witches supernaturall actions : like as when a juggler hath discovered 
the slight and illusion of his principall feats, one would fondlie continue 
to thinke, that his other petie juggling knacks of legierdemaine are 
done by the helpe of a familiar : and according to the follie of some 
papists, who seeing and confessing the popes absurd religion, in the 
erection and maintenance of idolatrie and superstition, speciallie in 
images, pardons, and relikes of saints, will yet persevere to thinke, 
that the rest of his doctrine and trumperie is holie and good. 
Finallie, manie mainteine and crie out for the execution of witches, 
that particularlie beleeve never a whit of that which is imputed unto 
them ; if they be therein privatelie dealt withall, and substantiallie 
16. opposed and tried in argument./ 
The eight Chapter. 
Causes that inoove as well witches themselves as others to thinke that 
they can worke impossibilities, with answers to certeine objec- 
tions : where also their punishment by lawe is touched. 
ARDANUS writeth, that the cause of such credulitie 
consisteth in three points ; to wit, in the imagina- 
tion of the melancholike, in the constancie of them 
that are corrupt therewith, and in the deceipt of the 
Judges ; who being inquisitors themselves against heretikes and 
witches, did both accuse and condemne them, having for their 
labour the spoile of their goods. So as these inquisitors added

--- PAGE 111 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. s- 13 
manie fables hereunto, least they should seeme to have doone 
injurie to the poore wretches, in condemning and executing them for 
none offense. But sithens (saith he) the springing up of Licthers sect, 
these priests have tended more diligentlie upon the execution of them ; 
bicause more wealth is to be caught from them : insomuch as now 
they deale so looselie with witches (through distrust of gaines) that 
all is scene to be malice, follie, or avarice that hath beene practised 
against them. And whosoever shall search into this cause, or read 
the cheefe writers hereupon, shall find his words true. 
It will be objected, that we here in England are not now directed An objection 
by the popes lawes ; and so by consequence our witches not troubled 
or convented by the inquisitors Hareticce pravitatis, I answer, that 
in times past here in England, as in other nations, this order of 
discipline hath beene in force and use ; although now some part of 
old rigor be qualified by two severall statutes made in the fift of 
Elizabeth, and xxxiii of Henriethc. eight. Nevertheles the estimation 
of the omnipotencie of their words and charmes seemeth in those 
statutes to be somewhat mainteined, as a matter hitherto generallie 
received ; and not yet so looked into, as / that it is refuted and decided. 12. 
But how wiselie so ever the Parle/ment house hath dealt therin, or 17. 
how mercifullie soever the prince beholdeth the cause : if a poore 
old woman, supposed to be a witch, be by the civill or canon lawe 
convented ; I doubt, some canon will be found in force, not onelie to 
give scope to the tormentor, but also to the hangman, to exercise their 
ofiices upon hir. And most certaine it is, that in what point soever 
anie of these extremities, which I shall rehearse unto you, be mitigated, 
it is thorough the goodnesse of the Queenes Majestic, and hir excellent 
magistrates placed among us. For as touching the opinion of our 
writers therein in our age ; yea in our owne countrie, you shall see 
it doth not onlie agree with forren crueltie, but surmounteth it farre. WW his 
If you read a foolish pamphlet dedicated to the lord Darcy by W. IV tooke, prin- 
1582. you shall see that he affirmeth, that all those tortures are farre ted in Anno 
■' ' ' Dom. 1532. 
too light, and their rigor too mild ; and that in that respect he 
impudentlie exclameth against our magistrates, who suffer them to be 
but hanged, when murtherers, & such malefactors be so used, which 
deserve not the hundreth part of their punishments. But if you will 
see more follie and lewdnes comprised in one lewd booke, I com- 
mend you to Ri. Ga. a. Windsor man ; who being a mad man hath 
written according to his frantike humor : the reading wherof may 
satisfie a wise man, how mad all these witchmoongers dealings be in 
this behalfe.

--- PAGE 112 ---
Cliap. 9. 
The discoverie 
The ninth Chapter. 
A conclusion of the first booke, wherein is fore-shewed (he tyramiicall 
cnieltie of witchmongers and inquisitors, with a request to the 
reader to peruse the same. 
ND bicause it may appeare unto the world what trecher- 
ous and faithlesse deahng, what extreame and intollerable 
tyrannic, what grosse and fond absurdities, what un- 
naturall & uncivil discourtisie, what cancred and spitefull 
malice, what outragious and barbarous crueltie, what lewd 
and false packing, what cunning and craftie intercepting, what 
bald and peevish inter / pretations, what abhominable and divelish 
inventions, and what flat and plaine knaverie is practised against 
these old women ; I will set downe the whole order of the 
inquisition, to the everlasting, inexcusable, and apparent shame 
of all witchmoongers. Neither will I insert anie private or doubt- 
full dealings of theirs ; or such as they can either denie to be 
usuall, or justlie cavill at ; but such as are published and renewed in 
all ages, since the commensement of poperie, established by lawes, 
practised by inquisitors, privileged by princes, commended by doctors, 
confirmed by popes, councels, decrees, and canons ; and finallie *be 
left of all witchmoongers ; to wit, by such as attribute to old women, 
and such like creatures, the power of the Creator. I praie you 
therefore, though it be tedious & intollerable (as you would be 
heard in your miserable calamities) so heare with compassion, their 
accusations, examinations, matters given in evidence, confessions, 
presumptions, interrogatories, conjurations, cautions, 
crimes, tortures and condemnations, 
devised and practised 
usuallie against 
them./

--- PAGE 113 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap, 3. 
^ The second Booke. 
The first Chapter, 
What testimonies and witnesses are allowed to give evidence against 
reputed witches, by the report Sr' allowance of the inquisitors 
themselves, and such as are speciall writers heerein. 
jxCOMMUNICAT persons, partakers of the fait, infants, 
wicked servants, and runnawaies are to be admitted to 
beare witnesse against their dames in this mater of 
witchcraft : bicause (saith Bodin the champion of witch- 
moongers) none that be honest are able to detect them. Here- 
ikes also and witches shall be received to accuse, but not to 
excuse a witch. And finallie, the testimonie of all infamous per- 
sons in this case is good and allowed. Yea, one lewd person (saith 
Bodin) maybe received to accuse and condemne a thousand suspected 
witches. And although bylawe, a capitall enimie may be challenged ; 
yet James Sprenger, and Henrie Institor, (from whom Bodin, and all 
the writers that ever I have read, doo receive their light, authorities 
and arguments) sale (upon this point of lawe) that The poore frend- 
lesse old woman must proove, that hir capitall enimie would have 
illed hir, and that hee hath both assalted & wounded hir ; otherwise 
she pleadeth all in vaine. If the judge aske hir, whether she have 
anie capitall enimies ; and she rehearse other, and forget hir accuser > 
or else answer that he was hir capitall enimie, but now she hopeth he 
is not so : such a one is nevertheles admitted for a witnes. And 
though by lawe, single witnesses are not admittable ; yet if one depose 
she/ hath bewitched hir cow; another, hir sow; and the third, hir 
butter : these saith (saith M. Mai. zxid Bodin) are no single witnesses ; 
bicause they agree that she is a witch. 
The second Chapter, 
The order of examination of witches by the inquistors. 
OMEN suspected to be witches, after their apprehension 
may not be suffered to go home, or to other places, to 
seek suerties : for then (saith Bodin) the people would 
be woorse willing to accuse them ; for feare least 
returne home, they worke revenge upon them. In which 
Bodin commendeth much the Scottish custome and order 
behalfe : where (he saith) a hollowe peece of wood 
ig. 13. 
at their 
respect 
in this 
Mai. Male/, 
quest. 5. pa. 3. 
/. Bod. lib. 4. 
cap. 2, de da- 
man. 
Arch, in C. al- 
le.accusatus. 
in §. Iz. super, 
verba. 
I.Bod. lib. 4. 
cap. I. de doe- 
man. 
Mai. Malef 
quest. 56. 
pa. 3, <fc quce. 
i,part. 3. 
Ibidem. 
Que. 7. act 2. 
20. 
[Redupl.] 
The Scottish 
custOe of ac- 
cusing a witch.

--- PAGE 114 ---
I 6 Chap. 2. 
The dtscoverie 
or a chest is placed in the church, into the which any bodie may 
freelie cast a little scroll of paper, wherein may be conteined the 
name of the witch, the time, place, and fact, &c. And the same chest 
being locked with / three severall locks, is opened everie fifteenth daie 
by three inquisitors or officers appointed for that purpose ; which 
keepe three severall kaies. And thus the accuser need not be 
knowne, nor shamed with the reproch of slander or malice to his 
poore neighbour. 
Item, there must be great persuasions used to all men, women, and 
children, to accuse old women of witchcraft. 
Item, there may alwaies be promised impunitie and favour to 
witches, that confesse and detect others ; and for the contrarie, there 
may be threatnings and violence practised and used. 
Item, the little children of witches, which will not confesse, must be 
attached ; who (if they be craftilie handled saith Bodin) will confesse 
against their owne mothers. 
Item, witches must be examined as suddenlie, and as unawares as 
is possible : the which will so amaze them, that they will confesse 
any thing, supposing the divell hath forsaken them ; wheras if they 
21. should first be comitted to prison, the divell would tem/per with them, 
and informe them what to doo. 
Item, the inquisitor, judge, or examiner, must begin with small 
matters first. 
Item, they must be examined, whether their parents were witches 
or no : for witches (as these Doctors suppose) come by propagation. 
/. Bod. lib. di ^jjd Bodin setteth downe this principle in witchcraft, to wit, Si sum 
dtBmon. cap, i- ^ » 
L.parentes dt mater, sic etiam cst filia : howbeit the lawe forbiddeth it, Ob san- 
d€ testtbus. guinis reverentiam. 
Item, the examiner must looke stedfastlie upon their eies : for they 
cannot looke directlie upon a mans face (as Bodin afifirmeth in one 
place, although in another he saith, that they kill and destroie both 
men and beasts with their lookes.) 
Item, she must be examined of all accusations, presumptions, and 
faults, at one instant ; least sathan should afterwards dissuade hir 
from confession. 
Item, a witch may not be put in prison alone, least the divell dis- 
suade hir from confession, through promises of her indemnitie. For 
(saith Bodin) some that have beene in the gaole have prooved to flie 
awaie, as they were woont to doo when they met with Diana and 
Minerva, &^c. : and so brake their owne necks against the stone 
walles. 
Item, if anie denie hir owne confession made without torture, she

--- PAGE 115 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap, 2. 
is neverthelesse by that confession to be condemned, as in anie other 
crime. 
Item, the judges must seeme to put on a pittifull countenance and 
to mone them ; saieng, that It was not they, but the divell that com- 
mitted the murther, and that he compelled them to doo it ; and must 
make them beleeve that they thinke them to be innocents. 
Item, if they will confesse nothing but upon the racke or torture ; 
their apparell must be changed, and everie haire in their bodie must 
be shaven off with a sharpe razor. 
Item, if they have charmes for taciturnitie, so as they feele not 
the common tortures, and therefore confesse nothing : then some 
sharpe instrument must be thrust betwixt everie naile of their fingers 
and toes : which (as / Bodin saith) was king Childeberts devise, and is ic'chiidebens 
to this daie of all others the most effectuall. For by meanes of that crueii devise, 
extreme paine, they will (saith he) confesse anie / thing. 22. 
Item, Paulus Grillandus, being an old dooer in these matters, p, Griiiandus. 
wisheth that when witches sleepe, and feele no paine upon the 
torture, Donmie labia niea aperies should be said, and so (saith he) 
both the torments will be felt, and the truth will be uttered : Et sic ars 
debiditur arte. 
Item, Bodin saith, that at the time of examination, there should A subtiil 
be a semblance of great a doo, to the terrifi eing of the witch ; and jj^j^ devise 
that a number of instruments, gieves, manacles, ropes, halters, fetters, 
&c. be prepared, brought foorth, and laid before the examinate : and 
also that some be procured to make a most horrible and lamentable 
crie, in the place of torture, as though he or she were upon the racke, 
or in the tormentors hands : so as the examinate may heare it whiles 
she is examined, before she hir selfe be brought into the prison ; and 
perhaps (saith he) she will by this meanes confesse the matter. 
Item, there must be subborned some craftie spie, that may seeme 
to be a prisoner with hir in the like case ; who perhaps may in con- 
ference undermine hir, and so bewraie and discover hir. 
Item, if she will not yet confesse, she must be told that she is detected, 
and accused by other of hir companions ; although in truth there be 
no such matter : and so perhaps she will confesse, the rather to be 
revenged upon hir adversaries and accusers. 
The third Chapter, 
■ Matters of evidence against witches. 
F an old woman threaten or touch one being in health, 
who dieth shortlie after ; or else is infected with the 
leprosie, apoplexie, or anie other strange disease : it is 
(saith Bodin a permanent fact, and such an evidence, 
0

--- PAGE 116 ---
i8 
Chap. 3. 
TJie discovej'ie 
as condemnation or death must insue, without further proofe ; 
if anie bodie have mistrusted hir, or said before that she was a 
2j. witch. / 
Item, if anie come in, or depart out of the chamber or house, the 
doores being shut ; it is an apparent and sufficient evidence to a 
witches condemnation, without further triall : which thing Bodin 
never sawe. If he can shew me that feat, I will subscribe to his 
follie. For Christ after his resurrection used the same : not as a 
ridiculous toie, that everie witch might accomplish ; but as a speciall 
miracle, to strengthen the faith of the elect. 
Item, if a woman bewitch anie bodies eies, she is to be executed 
without further proofe. 
Item, if anie inchant or bewitch mens beasts, or come, or flie in the 
aire, or make a dog speake, or cut off anie mans members, and unite 
them againe to men or childrens bodies ; it is sufficient proofe to con- 
demnation. 
Item, presumptions and conjectures are sufficient proofes against 
16. witches. / 
Item, if three witnesses doo but saie, Such a woman is a witch ; 
then is it a cleere case that she is to be executed with death. Which 
matter Bodin saith is not onelie certeine by the canon and civill 
lawes, but by the opinion of pope Innocent, the wisest pope (as he 
saith) that ever was. 
Item, the complaint of anie one man of credit is sufficient to bring 
a poore woman to the racke or pullie. 
Item, a condemned or infamous persons testimonie is good and 
allowable in matters of witchcraft. 
Item, a witch is not to be delivered, though she endure all the 
tortures, and confesse nothing ; as all other are in anie criminall 
cases. 
Item, though in other cases the depositions of mania women at one 
instant are disabled, as insufficient in lawe ; bicause of the imbecillitie 
and frailtie of their nature or sex : yet in this matter, one woman, 
though she be a partie, either accuser or accused, and be also 
infamous and impudent (for such are Bodins words) yea and alreadie 
condemned ; she may neverthelesse serve to accuse and condemne a 
witch. 
Item, a witnesse uncited, and offering himselfe in this case is to be 
heard, and in none other. 
Item, a capitall enimie (if the enimitie be pretended to growe by 
34. meanes of witchcraft) may object against a witch ; and none / exception 
is to be had or made against him. 
Par. m L. Item, although the proofe of perjurie may put backe a witnesse in 
Bat .Spineus, 
/. Bod. de 
damon, lib. J. 
cap. 2. 
Alexander. 
L. ubi Hume- 
rus de testibus. 
I Bod. de da- 
inon. lib. 2. 
cap. 2.

