 angels. 
Rotiove a marquesse and an earle, he is resembled to a monster, Ronove. 
he bringeth singular understanding in rhetorike, faithfull servants, 
knowledge of toongs, favour of freends and foes ; and nineteene 
legions obeie him. 
Berith is a great and a terrible duke, and hath three names. Of Berith a 
some he is called Beall ; of the Jewes Berith ; of Nigromancers dWen? 
Boljry : he commeth foorth as a red souldier, with red clothing, and 
upon a horsse of that colour, and a crowne on his head. He answer- 
eth trulie of things present, past, and to come. He is compelled at a 
certeine houre, through divine vertue, by a ring of art magicke. He 
is also a lier, he turneth all mettals into gold, he adorneth a man with 
dignities, and confirmeth them, he speaketh with a cleare and a sub- 
till voice, and six and twentie legions are under him. 
Astaroth is a great and a strong duke, comming foorth in the shape Astarotu. 
of a fowle angell, sitting upon an infernall dragon, and carrieng on 
his right hand a viper : he answereth trulie to matters present, past.

--- PAGE 418 ---
320 
15- Booke. 
The discoverie 
Foras. 
[* Ital.] 
Furfur. 
and to come, and also of all secrets. He talketh willinglie of the 
creator of spirits, and of their fall, and how they sinned and fell : he 
saith he fell not of his owne accord. He maketh a man woonderfull 
learned in the liberall sciences, he ruleth fourtie legions. Let everie 
exorcist take heed, that he admit him not too neere him, bicause of 
his stinking breath. And therefore let the conjuror hold neere to his 
face a magicall ring, and that shall defend him. 
Foras, *alias Foveas is a great president, and is scene in the forme 
of a strong man, and in humane shape, he understandeth the vertue 
of hearbs and pretious stones : he teacheth fullie logicke, ethicke, 
and their parts : he maketh a man invisible, wittie, eloquent, and to 
live long ; he recovereth things lost, and discovereth treasures, and is 
lord over nine and twentie legions. 
Furfur is a great earle, appearing as an hart, with a firie taile, he 
lieth in everie thing, except he be brought up within a triangle; being 
j8^. bidden, he taketh angelicall forme, he speaketh/ with a hoarse voice, 
and willinglie maketh love betweene man and wife ; he raiseth thun- 
ders and lightnings, and blasts. Where he is commanded, he 
answereth well, both of secret and also of divine things, and hath 
rule and dominion over six and twentie legions. 
Marchosias. Marchosias is a great marquesse, he sheweth himselfe in the shape 
272. of a/ cruell shee woolfe, with a griphens wings, with a serpents taile, 
and spatting I cannot tell what out of his mouth. When he is in a 
mans shape, he is an excellent fighter, he answereth all questions 
trulie, he is faithfull in all the conjurors businesse, he was of the 
order of dominations, under him are thirtie legions : he hopeth after 
1 200. yeares to returne to the seventh throne, but he is deceived in 
that hope. 
Malfkas. Malphas is a great president, he is scene like a crowe, but being 
cloathed with humane image, speaketh with a hoarse voice, he build- 
eth houses and high towres wonderfuUie, and quicklie bringcth 
artificers togither, he throweth downe also the enimies edifications, 
he helpeth to good familiars, he receiveth sacrifices willinglie, but he 
deceiveth all the sacrificers, there obeie him fourtie legions. 
Vepar. Vepar, *alias Separ, a great duke and a strong, he is like a mermaid, 
he is the guide of the waters, and of ships laden with armour; he 
bringeth to passe (at the commandement of his master) that the sea 
shalbe rough and stormie, and shall appeare full of shippes ; he 
killeth men in three dales, with putrifieng their wounds, and pro- 
ducing maggots into them ; howbeit, they male be all healed with 
diligence, he ruleth nine and twentie legions. 
Sabnache. Sabnacke, *aHas Salmac, is a great marquesse and a strong, he 
commeth foorth as an armed soldier with a lions head, sitting on a

--- PAGE 419 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 2. 321 
pale horsse, he dooth marvelouslie change mans forme and favor, he 
buildeth high towres full of weapons, and also castels and cities ; he 
inflicteth men thirtie daies with wounds both rotten and full of mag- 
gots, at the exorcists commandement, he provideth good familiars, 
and hath dominion over fiftie legions. 
Sidonay, *alias Asnioday, a great king, strong and mightie, he is sidonay. 
seene with three heads, whereof the first is like a bull, the second like 
a man, the third like a ram, he hath a serpents taile, he belcheth 
flames out of his mouth, he hath feete like a goose, he sitteth/ on an 386. 
infernall dragon, he carrieth a lance and a flag in his hand, he goeth 
before others, which are under the power of Amayinon. When the 
conjuror exerciseth this office, let him be abroad, let him be warie 
and standing on his feete ; if his cap be on his head, he will cause 
all his dooings to be bewraied, which if he doo not, the exorcist 
shalbe deceived by Amaymon in everie thing. But so soone as he 
seeth him in the forme aforesaid, he shall call him by his name, 
saieng ; Thou art Asmoday : he will not denie it, and by and by he 
boweth downe to the ground ; he giveth the ring of vertues, he abso- 
lutelie teacheth geometrie, arythmetike, astronomic, and handicrafts. 
To all demands he answereth fullie and trulie, he maketh a man 
invisible, he shevveth the places where treasure lieth, and gardeth it, 
if it be among the legions of Amaymon, he hath under his power 
seventie two legions. 
Gaap, *alias Tap, a great president and a prince, he appeareth in a Gaaf. 
meridionall signe, and when he taketh humane shape he is the guide 
of the foure principall kings, as mightie as Bileth. There were cer- 
teine necromancers that offered sacrifices and burnt offerings unto 
him ; and to call him up, they exercised an art, saieng that Salomon 
the wise made it./ Which is false: for it was rather Cham, the Sonne 273. 
of Noah, who after the floud began first to invocate wicked spirits, who was 
He invocated Bileth, and made an art in his name, and a booke cromancer. 
which is knowne to manie mathematicians. There were burnt offer- 
ings and sacrifices made, and gifts given, and much wickednes 
wrought by the exorcists, who mingled therewithall the holie names 
of God, the which in that art are everie where expressed. Marie 
there is an epistle of those names written by Salomon, as also write 
Helias Hierosolymitamis and Helismis. It is to be noted, that if 
anie exorcist have the art of Bileth, and cannot make him stand 
before him, nor see him, I may not bewraie how and declare the 
meanes to conteine him, bicause it is abhomination, and for that 
I have learned nothing from Salomon of his dignitie and office. 
But yet I will not hide this ; to wit, that he maketh a man woon- 
derfull in philosophic and all the liberall sciences : he maketh love, 
T T

--- PAGE 420 ---
32 2 15- Booke. 
The discoverie 
I* Not in Wier] 
(t Press dupli- 
cation] 
387- 
Shax. 
U Hal.] 
[§ : in Wier] 
Procell. 
[P««/,Wier] 
Furcas. 
Murmur. 
[II and, etc., not 
in Wier] 
Cairn. 
274. 
388. 
hatred, insensibilitie,* invisibilitie, consecration, t and consecration 
of those things that are belonging unto the domination of Ainay- 
inon, and delivereth famihars out of the possession of o/ther 
conjurors, answering truly and perfectly of things present, past, & to 
come, & transferreth men most speedilie into other nations, he ruleth 
sixtie six legions, & was of the order of potestats. 
Shax, %alias Scox, is a darke and a great marquesse, like unto a 
storke, with a hoarse and subtill voice : he dooth marvellouslie take 
awaie the sight, hearing, and understanding of anie man, at the com- 
mandement of the conjuror : he taketh awaie monie out of everie 
kings house, and carrieth it backe after 1200. yeares, if he be com- 
manded,§ he is a horssestealer, he is thought to be faithfull in all 
commandements : and although he promise to be obedient to the 
conjuror in all things ; yet is he not so, he is a Her, except he be 
brought into a triangle, and there he speaketh divinelie, and telleth of 
things which are hidden, and not kept of wicked spirits, he promiseth 
good familiars, which are accepted if they be not deceivers, he hath 
thirtie legions. 
Procell is a great and a strong duke, appearing in the shape of an 
angell, but speaketh verie darklie of things hidden, he teacheth 
geometric and all the liberall arts, he maketh great noises, and 
causeth the waters to rore, where are none, he warmeth waters, and 
distempereth bathes at certeine times, as the exorcist appointeth him, 
he was of the order of potestats, and hath fourtie eight legions under 
his power. 
Furcas is a knight and commeth foorth in the similitude of a cruell 
man, with a long beard and a hoarie head, he sitteth on a pale horsse, 
carrieng in his hand a sharpe weapon, he perfectlie teacheth practike 
philosophic, rhetorike, logike, astronomic, chiromancie, pyromancie, 
and their parts : there obeie him twentie legions. 
Murmur is a great duke and an carle, appearing in the shape of a 
souldier, riding on a griphen, with a dukes crowne on his head; there 
go before him two of his ministers, with great trumpets, he teacheth 
philosophic absolutelie, he constraineth soules to come before the 
exorcist, to answer what he shall aske them, he was of the order 
partlic of thrones, and partlie of angels, ||and ruleth thirtie legions. 
Cairn is a great president, taking the forme of a thrush, but when 
he put/teth on mans shape, he answereth in burning ashes, carrieng in 
his hand a most sharpe swoord, he maketh the best/ disputers, hegiveth 
men the understanding of all birds, of the lowing of bullocks, and 
barking of dogs, and also of the sound and noise of waters, he answer- 
eth best of things to come, he was of the order of angels, and ruleth 
thirtie legions of divels.

--- PAGE 421 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 2. 
Rautii, or Raini is a great earle, he is seene as a crowe, but when Raum. 
he putteth on humane shape, at the commandement of the exorcist, 
he stealeth woonderfullie out of the kings house, and carrieth it 
whether he is assigned, he destroieth cities, and hath great despite 
unto dignities, he knoweth things present, past, and to come, and 
reconcileth freends and foes, he was of the order of thrones, and 
governeth thirtie legions. 
Halphas is a great earle, and commeth abroad like a storke, with a Haifhas. 
hoarse voice, he notablie buildeth up townes full of munition and 
weapons, he sendeth men of warre to places appointed, and hath 
under him six and twentie legions. 
Focalor is a great duke comming foorth as a man, with wings like a Focalor. 
griphen, he killeth men, and drowneth them in the waters, and over- 
turneth ships of warre, commanding and ruling both winds and seas. 
And let the conjuror note, that if he bid him hurt no man, he willinglie 
consenteth thereto : he hopeth after looo. yeares to returne to the 
seventh throne, but he is deceived, he hath three legions. 
Vine is a great king and an earle, he showeth himselfe as a lion, vine. 
riding on a blacke horsse, and carrieth a viper in his hand, he gladlie 
buildeth large towres, he throweth downe stone walles, and maketh 
waters rough. At the commandement of the exorcist he answereth 
of things hidden, of witches, and of things present, past, and to 
come. 
Bifrons is seene in the similitude of a monster, when he taketh the Bi/rons. 
image of a man, he maketh one woonderfull cunning in astrologie, 
absolutelie declaring the mansions of the planets, he dooth the like in 
geometrie, and other admesurements, he perfectlie understandeth the 
strength and vertue of hearbs, pretious stones, and woods, he changeth 
dead bodies from place to place, he seemeth to light candles upon the 
sepulchres of the dead, and hath under him six and twentie legions. 
Gamigm is a great marquesse, and is seene in the forme of a little Gamigin. 
horsse, when he taketh humane shape he speaketh with a/ hoarse ^8g. 
voice, disputing of all liberall sciences ; he bringeth also to passe, 
that the soules, which are drowned in the sea, or which dwell in 
purgatorie (which is called Cartagra, that is, affliction of soules) shall 
take aierie bodies, and evidentlie appeare and answer to interrogatories 
at the conjurors commandement ; he tarrieth with the exorcist, untill 
he have accomplished his desire, and hath thirtie legions under 
him. 
Zagan is a great king and a president, he commeth abroad like a Zagnn. 
bull, with griphens wings, but when he taketh humane shape, he 
maketh men wittie, he turneth all mettals into the coine of that 
dominion, and turneth water into wine, and wine into water, he also

--- PAGE 422 ---
.
324 IS Booke. The discoverie ^
turneth bloud into wine, & wine into bloud, & a foole into a wise man, i
he is head of thirtie and three legions./ (
Orias. 275. Orias is a great marquesse, and is seene as a lion riding on a strong '
horsse, with a serpents taile, and carrieth in his right hand two great I
serpents hissing, he knoweth the mansion of planets, and perfectlie I
teacheth the vertues of the starres, he transformeth men, he giveth I
dignities, prelacies, and confirmations, and also the favour of freends j
and foes, and hath under him thirtie legions. I
Value. Valac is a great president, and commeth abroad with angels wings 
like a boie, riding on a twoheaded dragon, he perfectlie answereth of ]
treasure hidden, and where serpents may be seene, which he delivereth 1
into the conjurors hands, void of anie force or strength, and hath j
dominion over thirtie legions of divels. |
Gomory. Gomory a strong and a mightie duke, he appeareth like a faire 
woman, with a duchesse crownet about hir midle, riding on a camell, 
he answereth well and truelie of things present, past, and to come, and 
of treasure hid, and where it lieth : he procureth the love of women, ;
especiallie of maids, and hath six and twentie legions. |
Vecarabia. DecamMa or Carabia, he commeth like a * and knoweth the force 
of herbes and pretious stones, and maketh all birds flie before the <
exorcist, and to tarrie with him, as though they were tame, and \
that they shall drinke and sing, as their maner is, and hath thirtie \
legions. 
Amdiiicias. Amduscias a great and a strong duke, he commeth foorth as an j
390' unicorne, when he standeth before his maister in humane/ shape, being j
commanded, he easilie bringeth to passe, that trumpets and all I
musicall instruments may be heard and not seene, and also that trees ■ 
shall bend and incline, according to the conjurors will, he is excellent j
among familiars, and hath nine and twentie legions. j
Andras. Andras is a great marquesse, and is seene in an angels shape with |
a head like a blacke night raven, riding upon a blacke and a verie \
strong woolfe, flourishing with a sharpe sword in his hand, he can kill \
the maister, the servant, and all assistants, he is author of discords, :
and ruleth thirtie legions. '
Andrcai- Andrealphus is a great marquesse, appearing as a pecocke, he \
raiseth great noises, and in humane shape perfectlie teacheth geome- v
trie, and all things belonging to admeasurements, he maketh a man 1
to be a subtill disputer, and cunning in astronomie, and transformeth |
a man into the likenes of a bird, and there are under him thirtie j
legions. ]
Osi. Ose is a great president, and commeth foorth like a leopard, and i
counterfeting to be a man, he maketh one cunning in the liberal] !
sciences, he answereth truelie of divine and secret things, he trans- i

--- PAGE 423 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 2. 325 
formeth a mans shape, and bringeth a man to that madnes, that he 
thinketh himselfe to be that which he is not ; as that he is a king or a 
pope, or that he weareth a crowne on his head, Durdtqice id regnum 
J, , , [* Wier has' no 
*ad horavi. ^d] 
Aym or Haborhn is a great duke and a strong, he commeth foorth Aym. 
with three heads, the first like a serpent, the second like a man having 
two * the third like a cat, he rideth on a viper, carrieng in his hand 
a light fier brand, with the flame whereof castels and cities are fiered, 
he maketh one wittie everie kind of waie, he answereth truelie of privie 
matters, and reigneth over twentie six legions./ 
Orobas is a great prince, he commeth foorth like a horsse, but when Orobas. 276. 
he putteth on him a mans idol, he talketh of divine vertue, he giveth 
true answers of things present, past, and to come, and of the divinitie, 
and of the creation, he deceiveth none, nor suffereth anie to be 
tempted, he giveth dignities and prelacies, and the favour of freends 
and foes, and hath rule over twentie legions. 
Vapula is a great duke and a strong, he is seene like a lion/ Vapuia. 
with griphens wings, he maketh a man subtill and wonderfull in ^gi. 
handicrafts, philosophie, and in sciences conteined in bookes, and is 
ruler over thirtie six legions. 
Cimeries is a great marquesse and a strong, ruling in the parts of Cimeries. 
Aphrica ; he teacheth perfectlie grammar, logicke, and rhetorike, he 
discovereth treasures and things hidden, he bringeth to passe, that a 
man shall seeme with expedition to be turned into a soldier, he rideth 
upon a great blacke horsse, and ruleth twentie legions. 
Amy is a great president, and appeareth in a flame of fier, but Amy. 
having taken mans shape, he maketh one marvelous in astrologie, and 
in all the liberall sciences, he procureth excellent familiars, he be- 
wraieth treasures preserved by spirits, he hath the governement of 
thirtie six legions, he is partlie of the order of angels, partlie of 
potestats, he hopeth after a thousand two hundreth yeares to returne 
to the seventh throne : which is not credible. 
Flauros a strong duke, is seene in the forme of a terrible strong Fiauros. 
leopard, in humane shape, he sheweth a terrible countenance, and 
fierie eies, he answereth trulie and fullie of things present, past, and 
to come ; if he be in a triangle,t he lieth in all thingsjand deceiveth in [t 'transpose ; 
other things, and beguileth in other busines, he gladlie talketh of the J^'^^ erroneous 
divinitie, and of the creation of the world, and of the fall ; he is duplication ot 
, 11 , ■ • 1 next clause] 
constramed by divme vertue, and so are all divels or spirits, to burne 
and destroie all the conjurors adversaries. And if he be commanded, 
he suffereth the conjuror not to be tempted, and he hath twentie 
legions under him. 
Balaiii is a great and a terrible king, he commeth foorlh with three Balam.

--- PAGE 424 ---
15- Booke. TJie discoverie 
heads, the first of a bull, the second of a man, the third of a ram, he 
hath a serpents taile, and flaming eies, riding upon a furious beare, 
and carrieng a hawke on his fist, he speaketh with a hoarse voice, 
answering perfectlie of things present, past, and to come, hee maketh 
a man invisible and wise, hee governeth fourtie legions, and was of the 
order of dominations. 
Allocer is a strong duke and a great, he commeth foorth like a 
soldier, riding on a great horsse, he hath a lions face, verie red, and 
3g2. with flaming eies, he speaketh with a big voice, he maketh a/ man 
woonderfull in astronomie, and in all the liberall sciences, he bringeth 
good familiars, and ruleth thirtie six legions. 
SaUos. Saleos is a great earle, he appeareth as a gallant soldier, riding on 
a crocodile, and weareth a dukes crowne, peaceable, &c. 
y>"^^l- Vteall is a great duke and a strong, he is seene as a great and 
terrible dromedarie, but in humane forme, he soundeth out in a base 
voice the Egyptian toong. This man above all other procureth the 
277. especiall love/ of women, and knoweth things present, past, and to 
come, procuring the love of freends and foes, he was of the order of 
potestats, and governeth thirtie seven legions. 
Ilaagenti. HaageuH is a great president, appearing like a great bull, having 
the wings of a griphen, but when he taketh humane shape, he maketh 
a man wise in everie thing, he changeth all mettals into gold, and 
changeth wine and water the one into the other, and commandeth as 
manie legions as Zagan. 
piucnix. Phcetlix is a great marquesse, appearing like the bird Phceiiir, 
having a childs voice : but before he standeth still before the con- 
juror, he singeth manie sweet notes. Then the exorcist with his 
companions must beware he give no eare to the melodie, but must by 
and by bid him put on humane shape ; then will he speake marvel- 
louslie of all woonderfull sciences. He is an excellent poet, and 
obedient, he hopeth to returne to the seventh throne after a thousand 
two hundreth yeares, and governeth twentie legions. 
stoias Stolas is a great prince, appearing in the forme of a nightraven, 
before the exorcist, he taketh the image and shape of a man, and 
teacheth astronomie, absolutelie understanding the vertues of herbes 
and pretious stones ; there are under him twentie six legions. 
326 
A Uoccr. 
^ Note that a legion is 6 6 6 6. and now by multiplication 
count how manie legions doo arise out of 
everie particular.!

--- PAGE 425 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 4 327 
►{< Secrehan secretorum, 
The secret of secrets ; 
Tu operans sis secretiis Jioruni* 
Thou that workst them, be secret in them. 
The third Chapter. 
The houres wherin principall divels tnay be bound, to wit, raised 
and restrained from dooing of hurt. 
MAYMON king of the east, Gorson king of the south, 
Zimimar king of the north, Goap king and prince of the 
west, may be bound from the third houre, till noone, and 
from the ninth houre till evening. Marquesses may be 
bound from the ninth houre till compline, and from compline till the 
end of the daie. Dukes may be bound from the first houre till noone ; 
and cleare wether is to be observed. Prelates may be bound in anie 
houre of the daie. Knights from daie dawning, till sunne rising ; or 
from evensong, till the sunne set. A President may not be bound in 
anie houre of the daie, except the king, vvhome he o/beieth, be invo- 
cated ; nor in the shutting of the evening. Counties or erles may be 
bound at anie houre of the daie, so it be in the woods orfeelds, where 
men resort not. 
This was SQJ. 
the work of 
one T. R. 
written in 
faire let- 
ters of red 
& blacke 
upo parch- 
ment, and 
made by 
him, Ann. 
1570. to 
the main- 
tenance of 
his living, 
the edifi- 
eng of the 
poore, and 
the glorie 
of gods ho- 
lie name : 
as he him- 
selfe saith. 
[« The Lat : 
Rom.] 
278. 
The fourth Chapter. 
The forme of adjuring or citing of the spirits aforesaid to arise 
and appeare. 
HEN you will have anie spirit, you must know his name 
and office ; you must also fast,t and be cleane from all [t fast not in 
I pollusion, three or foure dales before ; so will the spirit ^'^'^^ 
 I be the more obedient unto you. Then make a circle, and 
call up the spirit with great intention, and holding a ring in your 
hand, rehearse in your owne name, and your companions (for one 
must alwaies be with you) this/ praier following, and so no spirit shall jg4. 
annoie you, and your purpose shall take effect. JAnd note how this [t This not in 
agreeth with popish charmes and conjurations. Wier] 
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ the ^ father >^ and the 
Sonne ^ and the Holie-ghost holie trinitie and unseparable unitie.

