ith manie 
more that I could alledge, where mention is made of spirit, the 
Hebrue text useth no word but one ; to wit, rTl^ which signifieth 
(as I said) Spiritum, ventutn,flatum, halitum ; which may be Eng- 
lished, Spirit, wind, blast, breath. 
But before I enter upon the verie point of my purpose, it shall not 
be amisse, to make you acquainted with the collection of a certeine 
Schoole divine, who distinguisheth and divideth this word [Spirit]* 
into si.x significations ; saieng that it is sometimes taken for the aier, 
sometimes for the wind, sometimes for/ the bodies of the blessed, 
sometimes for the soules of the blessed, sometimes for the power 
imaginative or the mind of man ; and sometimes for God. Againe

--- PAGE 555 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 34.' 
457 
he saith, that of spirits there are two sorts, some created and some 
uncreated. 
A spirit uncreated (saith he) is God himselfe, and it is essentiallie 
taken, and agreeth unto the three persons notionaUie, to the Father, 
the Sonne, and the HoHe-ghost personaUie. A spirit created is a 
creature, and that is hkewise of two sorts ; to wit, bodilie, and bodi- 
lesse. A bodihe spirit is also of two sorts : for some kind of spirit 
is so named of spiritualnes, as it is distinguished from bodihnesse : 
otherwise it is called Spiritus d spiraiido, id est, d flando, of breathing 
or blowing, as the wind dooth. 
A bodilesse spirit is one waie so named of spiritualnes, and then 
it is taken for a spirituall substance ; and is of two sorts : some 
make a full and complet kind, and is called complet or perfect, as a 
spirit angelicall : some doo not make a full and perfect kind, and is 
called incomplet or unperfect, as the soule. There is also the spirit 
vitall, which is a certeine subtill or verie fine substance necessarilie 
disposing and tending unto life. There be moreover spirits naturall, 
which are a kind of subtill and verie fine substances, disposing and 
tending unto equall complexions of bodies. Againe there be spirits 
animall, which are certeine subtill and verie fine substances disposing 
and tempering the bodie, that it might be animated of the forme, 
that is, that it might be perfected of the reasonable soule. Thus 
farre he. In whose division you see a pbilosophicall kind of pro- 
ceeding, though not altogether/ to be condemned, yet in everie point 
not to be approoved. 
Now to the spirit of spirits, I meane the principall and holie spirit 
of God, which one defineth or rather describeth to be the third person 
in trinitie issuing from the father and the Sonne, no more the charitie 
dilection and love of the father and the sonne, than the father is the 
charitie dilection and love of the sonne and Holie-ghost. An other 
treating upon the same argument, proceedeth in this reverent manner: 
The holie spirit is the vertue or power of God, quickening, nourish- 
ing, fostering and perfecting all things : by whose onlie breathing it 
commeth to passe that we both know and love GOD, and become at 
the length like unto him : which spirit is the pledge and earnest 
pennie of grace, and beareth witnesse unto our heart, whiles wee crie 
Abba, Father. This spirit is called the spirit of GOD, the spirit of 
Christ, and the spirit of him which raised up Jesus from the dead. 
Jesus Christ, for that he received not the spirit by measure, but in 
fulnesse, doth call it his spirit ; saieng : When the comforter shall 
come, whome I will send, even the holie spirit, he shall testifie of 
me. This spirit hath diverse metaphoricall names attributed there- 
unto in the holie scriptures. It is called by the name of water, 
545- 
Erasm. Sar. 
in lib. loc. & 
lit. prcedictis. 
Laurent. A 
Villavicentio 
in phrasib. s. 
script, lit. S. 
pag. 176. 
Rom. 8, 15. 
2. Cor. 6, 5. 
John. 15, 26.

--- PAGE 556 ---
458 Chap. A discourse of 
birause it washeth, comforteth, moisteneth, softeneth, and maketh 
fruitefull with all godlinesse and vertues the minds of men, which 
otherwise would be uncleane, comfortlesse, hard, drie, and barren of 
Isai. 44- all goodnesse : vvherupon the prophet Isaie saith; I will povvre water 
391. upon the thirstie, and floods upon the drie ground, &c./ Wherewith- 
Joim. 7. 38 all the words of Christ doo agree ; Hee that beleeveth in me, as 
saith the scripture, out of his bellie shall flowe rivers of waters of 
joiin. 4. 14. life. And else where ; Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall 
give him, shall never be more a thirst. Other places likewise there 
be, wherein the holie spirit is signified by the name of water and 
flood : as in the 13. of Isaie, the 29. of Ezecli. the 146. Psahtie, &'c. 
The same spirit by reason of the force and vehemencie thereof is 
termed fier. For it doth purifie and cleanse the whole man from top 
to toe, it doth burne out the soile and drosse of sinnes, and setteth 
him all in a flaming and hot burning zeale to preferre and further 
Gods glorie. Which plainelie appeared in the apostles, who when 
they had re/ceived the spirit, they spake fierie words, yea such words 
as were uncontiollable, in so much as in none more than in them 
Jer. 23,59. this saieng of the prophet /eremze was v^xx^y^A., Nunqiiid 71071 ve7-ba 
tiiea simt quasi 7g7iis? Are not my words even as it were fier? This 
was declared and shewed by those fierie toongs, which were scene 
upon the apostles after they had received the holie spirit. 
Moreover, this spirit is called annointing, or ointment, bicause that 
as in old time preests and kings were by annointing deputed to their 
office and charge, and so were made fit and serviceable for the same : 
even so the elect are not so much declared as renewed and made apt 
by the training up of the holie spirit, both to live well and also to 
I. Joh. 2, 20. glorifie God. Whereupon dependeth the saieng of Jo/m ; And yee 
have no need that anie should teach you, but as the same ointment 
doth teach you. It is also called in scripture, The oile of gladnesse 
Psai. 44. and rejoising, whereof it is said in the booke of Psah7tes ; God even 
thy God hath annointed thee with the oile of joy & gladnes, &c. 
Cyril!, in e- And by this goodlie and comfortable name of oile in the scriptures 
vang. Joh. lib. . , ■' . . ^ . . . , ^' , 
3. ca/: 14. IS the mercie of God oftentn-nes expressed, because the nature of that 
doth agree with the propertie and qualitie of this. For as oile doth 
flote and swim above all other liquors, so the mercie of God doth 
surpasse and overreach all his works, and the same doth most of all 
disclose it selfe to miserable man. 
Exod. 8. It is likewise called the finger of God, that is, the might and power 
of God : by the vertue whereof the apostles did cast out divels ; to 
wit, even by the finger of God. It is called the spirit of truth, 
because it maketh men true and faithfull in their vocation : and for 
that it is the touchstone to trie all counterfet devises of mans braine,

--- PAGE 557 ---
Divels and spirits. ciiap.34. 459 
and all vaine sciences, prophane practises, deceitfull arts, and cir- 
cumventing inventions ; such as be in generall all sorts of witchcrafts 
and inchantments, within whose number are comprehended all those 
wherewith I have had some dealing in this my discoverie ; to wit, 
charmes or incantations, divinations, augurie, judiciall astrologie, 
nativitie casting, alcumystrie, conjuration, lotshare, poperie which is 
meere paltrie, with diverse other : not one wherof no nor all together 
are able to stand to the triall and examination, which this spirit of 
truth shall and will take of those false and evill spirits. Naie, they 
shalbe found, when/ they are laid into the balance, to be lighter than 547- 
vanitie : verie drosse, when they once come to be tried by the fervent 
heate of this spirit ; and like chafife, when this spirit bloweth upon 
them, driven awaie with a violent whirlewind: such is the per/fection, 392. 
integritie, and effectuall operation of this spirit, whose working as it 
is manifold, so it is marvellous, and therefore may and is called the 
spirit of spirits. 
This spirit withdrawing it selfe from the harts of men, for that it The hoiie 
will not inhabit and dwell where sinne hath dominion, giveth place abide no" 
unto the spirit of error and blindnesse, to the spirit of servitude and !'""8 that 
^ ' ^ , IS carnall, 
compunction, which biteth, gnaweth, and whetteth their harts with and un- 
a deadlie hate of the gospell ; in so much as it greeveth their minds 
and irketh their eares either to heare or understand the truth ; of 
which disease properlie the phariseis of old were, and the papists 
even now are sicke. Yea, the want of this good spirit is the cause 
that manie fall into the spirit of perversenes and frowardnes, into the 
spirit of giddinesse, lieng, drowzines, and dulnesse : according as the 
prophet Isaie saith ; For the Lord hath covered you with a spirit isai. 29, 10. 
of slumber, and hath shut up your eies : and againe else-where, 
Dominies viiscuit hi medio, Ss^c : The Lord hath mingled among them isai. 19, 14. 
the spirit of giddinesse, and hath made Aegypt to erre, as a dronken 
man erreth in his vomit: as it is said hy Pan le; And their foolish hart Ro. i, zi, 23. 
was blinded, and God gave them over unto their owne harts lusts. 
Which punishment Moses threateneth unto the Jews ; The Lord shall Deuter. 28, 
smite thee with madnesse, with blindnesse and amazednesse of 
mind, and thou shalt grope at high noone as a blind man useth to 
grope, &c. 
In summe, this word [Spirit] dooth signifie a secret force and 
power, wherewith our minds are mooved and directed ; if unto holie 
things, then is it the motion of the holie spirit, of the spirit of Christ 
and of God : if unto evill things, then is it the suggestion of the 
wicked spirit, of the divell, and of satan. Whereupon I inferre, by A question, 
the waie of a question, with what spirit we are to suppose such to be 
mooved, as either practise anie of the vanities treated upon in this

--- PAGE 558 ---
460 
Chap. 34. 
A discourse of 
An answer. 
A gmat 
likelihood 
no doubt. 
Judgement 
distingui- 
shed. 
booke, or through credulitie addict themselves thereunto as unto 
divine oracles, or the voice of angels breakeing through the clouds ? 
^48. We cannot impute this motion unto/ the good spirit ; for then they 
should be able to discerne betweene the nature of spirits, and not 
swarve in judgement : it followeth therefore, that the spirit of blind- 
nes and error dooth seduce them ; so that it is no mervell if in the 
alienation of their minds they take falsehood for truth, shadowes for 
substances, fansies for verities, &c : for it is likelie that the good 
spirit of God hath forsaken them, or at leastwise absented it selfe from 
them : else would they detest these divelish devises of men, which 
consist of nothing but delusions and vaine practises, whereof (I 
suppose) this my booke to be a sufficient discoverie. 
It will be said that I ought not to judge, for he that judgeth shalbe 
judged. Whereto I answer, that judgement is to be understood of 
three kind of actions in their proper nature ; whereof the first are 
secret, and the judgement of them shall apperteine to God, who in 
time will disclose what so ever is done in covert, and that by his just 
judgement. The second are mixed actions, taking part of hidden and 
part of open, so that by reason of their uncerteintie and doubtfulnes 
they are discussable and to be tried ; these after due examination are 
to have their competent judgement, and are incident to the magistrate. 
393. The third are manifest and/ evident, and such as doo no lesse ap- 
parentlie shew themselves than an inflammation of bloud in the bodie: 
and of these actions everie private man giveth judgement, bicause 
they be of such certeintie, as that of them a man may as well con- 
elude, as to gather, that bicause the sunne is risen in the east, Ergo* 
it is morning : he is come about and is full south. Ergo* it is high 
noone; he is declining and closing up in the west, Ergo* it is evening. 
So that the objection is answered. 
Howbeit, letting this passe, and spirituallie to speake of this spirit, 
which whiles manie have wanted, it hath come to passe that they 
have prooved altogether carnall ; & not savouring heavenlie divinitie 
have tumbled into worsse than philosophicall barbarisme : & these 
be such as of writers are called Pneuinatomachi, a sect so injurious to 
the holie spirit of God, that contemning the sentence of Christ, 
wherein he foretelleth that the sinne against the holie spirit is never 
to be pardoned, neither in this world nor in the world to come, they 
doo not onelie denie him to be God, but also pull from him all being, 
^^g. and with the Saddnces main/teine there is none such ; but that under 
and by the name of holie spirit is ment a certeine divine force, where- 
with our minds are mooved, and the grace and favour of God whereby 
we are his beloved. Against these shamelesse enimies of the holie 
spirit, I will not use materiall weapons, but syllogisticall charmes. And 
* Josias Sim- 
Icrtis li. 4. ca. 
5. adversus 
vetcres 6" 
novos Anti- 
trinitarios, 
dfc.

--- PAGE 559 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 34. 
461 
first I will set downe some of their paralogysmes or false arguments ; 
and upon the necke of them inferre fit confutations grounded upon 
sound reason and certeine truth. 
Their first argument is knit up in this manner. The holie spirit is 
no where expresselie called God in the scriptures ; Ergo he is not 
God, or at leastwise he is not to be called God. The antecedent of 
this argument is false ; bicause the holie spirit hath the title or name 
of God in the fift of the Acts. Againe, the consequent is false. For 
although he were not expresselie called God, yet should it not ther- 
upon be concluded that he is not verie God ; bicause unto him are 
attributed all the properties of God, which unto this doo equallie 
belong. And as we denie not that the father is the true light, although 
it be not directlie written of the father, but of the sonne ; He was the 
true light giving light to everie man that cometh into this world : so 
likewise it is not to be denied, that the spirit is God, although the 
scripture dooth not expresselie and simplie note it ; sithence it 
ascribeth equall things thereunto ; as the properties of God, the 
works of God, the service due to GOD, and that it dooth inter- 
changeablie take the names of Spirit and of God oftentimes. They 
therefore that see these things attributed unto the holie spirit, and 
yet will not suffer him to be called by the name of God ; doo as it 
were refuse to grant unto Eve the name of Homo,-\ whome notwith- 
standing they confesse to be a creature reasonable and mortall. 
The second reason is this. Hilarie in all his twelve bookes of the 
Trinitie dooth no where write that the holie spirit is to be worshipped ; 
he never giveth therunto the name of God, neither dares he otherwise 
pronounce thereof, than that it is the spirit of God. Besides this, 
there are usuall praiers of the church commonlie called the Collects, 
whereof some are made to the father, some to the sonne, but none to 
the holie spirit ; and/ yet in them all mention is made of the three 
persons. *Hereunto I answer, that although Hilarie dooth not 
openlie call the holie spirit, God :/ yet doth he constantly denie it to 
be a creature. Now if any aske me why Hilarie was so coie & nice 
to name the holie spirit, God, whom he denieth to be a creature, when 
as notwithstanding betweene God and a creature there is no meane : 
I will in good sooth sale what I thinke. I suppose that Hilarie^ for 
himselfe, thought well of the godhead of the holie spirit : but this 
opinion was thrust and forced upon him of the Pneiimatomachi, who 
at that time rightlie deeming of the sonne did erwhiles joine them- 
selves to those that were sound of judgement. There is also in the 
ecclesiasticallhistorie a little booke which they gave Liberius a bishop 
of Rome, whereinto they foisted the Nicene creed. And that Hilarie 
was a freend of the Pneicinafoinac/ii, it is perceived in his booke De 
I. Objeclio. 
The scrip- 
ture doolh 
ne\'er call 
the holie 
spirit God. 
'-'^ The first 
answer. 
A refutati ■ 
on of the 
antece- 
dent, &c. 
[t/M/.] 
2. ObjectiS. 
Hilarie doth 
not call the 
spirit God, 
neither is 
he so na- 
med in the 
common 
collects. 
395[4]. 
* The 2. 
answer. 
550- 
Hilarius lib. 
12. de Triad e

--- PAGE 560 ---
462 
Chip. 34. 
A discourse of 
Tlie place 
is long, and 
therefore 
I had rather 
referre the 
reader unto 
the booke 
than heere 
to insert so 
many lines. 
ColUcta in die 
doyuin. satu- 
ta Trinit. 
[• ? is] 
3. Objectio. 
The spirit 
is not to be 
praied unto 
but the fa- 
ther onlie. 
[t //«/•] 
* 3. An.swer. 
The conse- 
quent is de- 
nied. 
551- 
395. 
synodis, where he writeth in this maner ; Nihil atctem minim vobis 
videri debet, fratres charissiini, Ss^c : It ought to seeme no wonder 
unto you deere brethren, &c. As for the objection of the praiers of 
the church called the collects, that in them the holie spirit is not 
called upon by name : we oppose and set against them the songs of 
the church, wherein the said spirit is called upon, but the collects 
are more ancient than the songs, hymnes, and anthems. I will not 
now contend about ancientnesse, neither will I compare songs and 
collects togither ; but I say thus much onelie, to wit, that in the most 
ancient times of the church the holie spirit hath beene openlie called 
upon in the congregation. Now if I be charged to give an instance, 
let this serve. In the collect upon trinitie sundaie it is thus said : 
Almightie and everlasting God, which hast given unto us thy servants 
grace by the confession of a truth to acknowledge the glorie of the 
eternall trinitie, and in the power of the divine Majestic to worship 
the unitie : we beseech thee that thorough the stedfastnesse of this 
faith, we may evermore be defended from all adversitie, which livest 
and reignest one God world without end. Now bicause that in this 
collect, where the trinitie is expresselie called upon, the names of 
persons are not expressed ; but almightie and everlasting God invo- 
cated, who abideth in trinitie and unitie ; it doth easilie appeare 
elsewhere also that the persons being not named, under the name of 
almightie and everlasting God, not onelie the father* to be understood, 
but God which abideth in trinitie and unitie, that is the father, the 
Sonne, and the Holie-ghost./ 
A third objection of theirs is this. The sonne of GOD oftentimes 
praieng in the gospels, speaketh unto the father, promiseth the holie 
spirit, and dooth also admonish the apostles to praie unto the heaven- 
lie father, but yet in the name of the sonne. Besides that, he pre- 
scribeth them this forme of praier : Our father which art in heaven. 
Ergo\ the father onlie is to be called upon, and consequentlie the 
father onelie is that one and verie true God, of whome it is written ; 
Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him onelie shalt thou 
serve. 
* Whereto I answer first by denieng the consequent ; The sonne 
praied to the father onelie, Ergo\ the father onlie is of us also to be 
praied unto. For the sonne of GOD is distinguished of us both in 
person and in office : he as a mediator maketh intercession for us to 
the father : and although the/ sonne and the holie spirit doo both 
togither receive and take us into favour with God ; yet is he said to 
intreat the father for us ; bicause the father is the fountaine of all 
counsels & divine works. Furthermore, touching the forme of 
praieng prescribed of Christ, it is not necessarie that the fathers

--- PAGE 561 ---
Divels and spirits. cimp. 34. 463 
name shuld personallie be there taken, sith there is no distinction of 
persons made: but by the name of father indefinitehe we understand 
God or the essence of God, the father, the son, and the HoHe-ghost. 
For this name hath not alwaies a respect unto the generation of the 
Sonne of God ; but God is called the father of the faithfull, bicause 
of his gratious and free adopting of them, the foundation whereof is 
the Sonne of God, in whom we be adopted : but yet so adopted, that 
not the father onelie receiveth us into his favour ; but with him also 
the Sonne and the holy spirit dooth the same. Therefore when we 
in the beginning of praier doo advertise our selves of Gods good- 
nesse towards us ; we doo not cast an eie to the father alone, but 
also to the sonne, who gave us the spirit of adoption ; and to the 
holie spirit, in whom we crie Abba, Father. And if so be that invo- 
cation and praier were restreined to the father alone, then had the 
saints doone amisse, in calling upon, invocating, and praieng to the 
sonne of God, and with the sonne the holy spirit, in baptisme, accord- 
ing to the forme by Christ himselfe assigned and delivered. 
Another objection is out of the fourth of Amos, in this maner. [Am. 4, 13 ] 
For lo it is I that make the thunder, and create the spirit, and/ shew ^§3. 
unto men their Christ, making the light and the clouds, and mounting ^ ObjecHo. 
above the hie places of the earth, the Lord God of hosts is his name, that the spi- 
Now bicause it is read in that place, Shewing unto men their Christ; "ted*^"''^* 
the Pnezimatojnachi contended that these words are to be understood 
of the holie spirit. 
*But Ambrose in his booke De spiritu sancto, lib. 2. cap. 7. doth *4; Answer, 
rightlie answer, that by spirit in this place is ment the wind : for if fhis"pi'ace 
the prophets purpose and will had beene to speake of the holie spirit, ^yf^^*"*^"^ 
he would not have begunne with thunder, nor have ended with light 
and clouds. Howbeit, the same father saith ; If anie suppose that 
these words are to be drawne unto the interpretation of the holie 
spirit, bicause the prophet saith. Shewing unto men their Christ ; 
he ought also to draw these words unto the mysterie of the Lords 
incarnation : and he expoundeth thunder to be the words of the 
Lord, and spirit to be the reasonable and perfect soule. But the 
former interpretation is certeine and convenient with the words of 
the prophet, by whom there is no mention made of Christ ; but the 
power of God is set foorth in his works. Behold (saith the prophet) 
he that formeth the mountaines, and createth the wind, and declareth 
unto man what is his thought, which maketh the morning darknesse, 
and walketh upon the hie places of the earth, the Lord God of hosts 
is his name. In this sort Sanies a right skilfull man in the Hebrew Jo°t him'to'^ 
toong translateth this place of the prophet. But admit this place ^^^'f'^ 
were written of the holie spirit, & were not appliable either to the not.

--- PAGE 562 ---
464 
Chap. 34- 
A discourse of 
Eiiseb. Co'sa- 
riens. li. 3. ad- 
versus Mar- 
396. 
553- 
5. ObjectiO. 
All things 
were made 
by the son, 
Ergo the spi- 
rit was also 
made by 
him. 
^' 5. Answer. 
Universal! 
proposilios 
or speeches 
are to be re- 
strained. 
6. ObjectiO. 
wind or to the Lords incarnation : yet doth it not follow that the 
holie spirit is a creature ; bicause this word of Creating doth not 
alwaies signifie a making of something out of nothing ; as Eusebius 
in expounding these words (The Lord created me in the beginning of 
his waies) writeth thus. The prophet in the person of God,/ saieng ; 
Behold I am he that made the thunder, and created the spirit, and 
shewed unto men their Christ : this word Created is not so to be 
taken, as that it is to be concluded thereby, that the same was not 
before. For God hath not so created the spirit, sithence by the same 
he hath shewed & declared his Christ unto all men. Neither was it 
a thing of late beginning under the sonne : but it was before all 
beginning, and was then sent, when the apostles were gathered 
togither, when a sound like thunder came/ from heaven, as it had 
beene the comming of a mightie wind : this word Created being used 
for sent downe, for appointed, ordeined, &c : and the word thunder 
signifieng in another kind of maner the preaching of the gospels. 
The like saieng is that of the Psalmist, A cleane hart create in me 
O God : wherein he praied not as one having no hart, but as one 
that had such a hart as needed purifieng, as needed perfecting : & 
this phrase also of the scripture. That he might create two in one 
new man ; that is, that he might joine, couple, or gather together, 
&c. 
Furthermore, the Pneiniiatomachi by these testimonies insuing 
endevor to proove the holie spirit to be a creature. Out of John the 
I. chap. By this word were all things made, and without it nothing 
was made. Out of i. Cor. 8. Wee have one God the father, even he 
from whome are all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, 
through whome are all things, and we by him. Out of the i. Coloss. 
By him were a