tchcraft, dismasketh 
sundry egregious impostures, and in certaine principall Chapters, & 
speciall passages, hitteth the nayle on the head with a witnesse: how- 
soever I could have wished, [G. H. is nothing if he be not quasi- 
critical and emending] he had either dealt somewhat more curteously 
with Monsieur Bodine, or cofuted him somewhat more effectually." 
Of course, various of the after-writers on witchcraft, whichever 
side they took, either spoke of him explicitly, or alluded to him ;

--- PAGE 55 ---
Introduction. 
xlv 
Webster, Wagstaffe, Ady, and others, on the same side as Scot, and 
Meric Casaubon, Cotta, etc., ending with Glanvil on the other. But 
these, the really curious in such matters may be left to search out 
for themselves. Only I would like to mention John Deacon's and 
John Walker's Dialogicall Discourses of ... Devils [etc.], 1601, both 
because they, being clergymen, had the boldness — besides adding new 
arguments of their own, and though their wording is somewhat less 
decided than their own evident belief — out of three explanations of the 
case of the Witch of Endor which they set before the reader, to 
plainly prefer Scot's view of her ventriloquism, both naming him in 
the text, and giving the reference to his page in their margin ; and 
secondly, because so far as a hasty look enables one to give an 
opinion, they spoke more rationally on magical and other points than 
one would at that date expect. They also quote the opinion of Hip- 
pocrates on magical cures, as given by Scot, p. 450, and show that 
they take it, though not literally, from him, and not from Hippocrates 
directly, by giving a reference to Scot in the margin. Afterwards 
they published in 1603, a second large work, A sum7narie\f\ answer 
to John Darrell, the first work having been also suggested by the same 
impostor, and his setting forth of himself as a caster out of devils. 
I have said on p. xxii that the discovery of Scot's name in the Sub- 
sidy Rolls for 1 586 and 1587 with the affix of " Armiger" was for me an 
important find. And now I would explain that it was so, inasmuch 
as it set my mind at rest as to the oneness of the Raynold of the 
Hoppe-garden with the Reginald Scot Esquire, of the Witchcraft. 
Aware that Reynold and Reginald were variants of one name, used of 
and by the same person, the following facts hindered me for a long 
time from accepting the common belief that the Raynold and Regi- 
nald of these two works were one and the same. First, the author 
of the Hoppe-garden in each of his signatures to the editions of 
1574-6-8, three in each, appears as Raynold. In the marriage entry, in 
the pay-account of the Kent forces, in the Muster-roll, and in the Will, 
it is also Raynold. But in 1584, throughout the Witchcraft, that is, 
four times in all, the name appears as Reginald. Secondly, in the Will 
of 1 599) in accordance with the want of any title on the title-page of the 
Hoppe-garden, he describes himself as " gent", and in the Inquisitio 
p. m., though he is called Reginald, the document being in Latin, he

--- PAGE 56 ---
xlvi 
Introduction. 
is, as in his Will, "generosus". But in the title-page of the Witch- 
craft, he is Reginald Scot Esquire. The finding no evidence of the 
separate existence of a Raynold and a Reginald, the frequent refer- 
ences to the Scriptures in the Witchcraft, and the very frequent refer- 
ences to the Proverbs and Ecclesiastes, in the "Address to the 
Reader" of the Hoppe-garden, the use in both works, as already quoted, 
of certain legal phrases, and the occurrence in the prefatory part of 
the Hoppe-garden of "with the licour (or rather the lucre)", and 
" condemne the man, or rather the mynde", a trick of language not 
unfrequently repeated in the Discoverie, a trick resulting from his 
love of irony, shook my doubts. But there were still, the want of any 
title after the name in the Hoppe-garden, the "gent" of the Will, 
and the "generosus" of the Inquisitio, as against the "Esquire" of the 
Discoverie. First, however. Hunter's suggestion, that his esquireship 
was due to his having been appointed a Justice of the Peace, and then 
the discovery of armiger after his name, have removed all reasonable 
doubts; and to turn our belief to a positive certainty, it only remains 
to discover that he was a Justice of the Peace. 
Possibly the reader may now expect some pages on Scot's style 
as a writer, and on his claim — his claim, yet not one made by him- 
self— to be considered an English classic. But, besides that, I am 
not "greatly aesthetic", and besides having expressed my opinions 
in more than one place in this Introduction, I think that any reader, 
with any appreciation of style, and of the manner in which an argu- 
ment ought to be carried out, can come to but one conclusion. Such 
belief, I may add, is strengthened by this, that most writers whom I 
have consulted are of this opinion : and I would conclude with three 
quotations, chiefly regarding the way in which he carried out his 
argument. The Rev. Jos. Hunter, in his MS. Chorus Vatuni, ch. v, 
says : " In fact, I had no notion of the admirable character of this 
book till I read it this September 1839. It is one of the few instances 
in which a bold spirit opposes himself to the popular belief, and 
seeks to throw protection over a class of the defenceless. In my 
opinion, he ought to stand very prominent in any catalogue of 
Persons who have been public benefactors." 
" To answer his argument was wholly impossible, and though the 
publication of his book did not put an end to the notion which con-

--- PAGE 57 ---
Introduction. 
xlvii 
tinned very prevalent for a century afterwards [though we know from 
Ady that it greatly checked the beHef for a time], yet it had, I have 
no doubt, much to do with the silent and gradual extinction of it." 
So D'Israeli, in his Amenities of Literature, has these words : "A 
single volume sent forth from the privacy of a retired student, by its 
silent influence may mark an epoch in the history of the human 
mind." 
" Such a volume was The Discoverie of Witchcraft, by Reginald 
Scot, a singular work, which may justly claim the honour in this 
country of opening that glorious career which is dear to humanity 
and fatal to imposture." 
Thirdly, Professor W. T. Gairdner, M.D. and LL.D., thus speaks, 
in his address on " Insanity : Modern Views as to its Nature and 
Treatment", read before the Glasgow Medico-Chirurgical Society : 
" But I cannot leave it [witchcraft] . . . without expressing, more 
strongly than even Mr. Lecky does, the unqualified admiration and 
surprise which arise in the mind on finding that in 1584 . . . there 
was at least one man in England . . . who could scan the whole field 
of demonology, and all its terrible results in history, with an eye as 
clear from superstition, and a judgment as sound and unwavering in 
its opposition to abuses, as that of Mr. Lecky himself There is only 
one book, so far as I know, in any language, written in the sixteenth 
or even the seventeenth century, that merits this praise : and it is a 
book which, notwithstanding its wide human interest, its great and 
solid learning, and a charming English style that makes it most 
readable, even at the present day, has never been reprinted for two 
hundred years, and is therefore extremely inaccessible to most 
readers. Reginald Scot's Discoverie of Witchcraft . . . stands brightly 
out amid the darkness of its own and the succeeding age, as a per- 
fectly unique example of sagacity amounting to genius." He adds: 
" Nothing, however, is more evident than that Scot, however indebted 
to Wier (and both of them, probably, to Cornelius Agrippa . . . ), 
was far in advance of either in the clearness of his views and the 
unwavering steadiness of his leanings to the side of humanity and 
justice."

--- PAGE 58 ---
Note. — The italic numerals in the side margins 
denote the pages of the first, the ordinary numbers 
those of the second edition.

--- PAGE 59 ---
The difcouerie 
of witchcraft, 
Wherein the lewde dealing of witches 
and witckmongers is notablie detected^ the 
knauerie of coniurors, the impietie of inchan- 
tors, the follie of /ootk/aiers, the impudent falf- 
hood of coufenors, the infidelitie of atheifts, 
the pejiilent pra^ifes of Pythonifls, the 
curiofitie of figurecafters, the va- 
nitie of dreamers^ the begger- 
lie art of Alcu- 
myftrie, 
The abhomination of idolatrie, the hor- 
rible art of poifoning, the vertue and power of 
naturall magike, and all the conueiances 
of Legierdemaine and higgling are deciphered: 
and many other things opened, which 
haue long lien hidden, howbeit 
verie neceflarie to 
be knowne. 
Heerevnto is added a treatife vpon the 
nature and fubftance of fpirits and diuels^ 
&c : all latelie written 
by Reginald Scot 
Efquire. 
I. lohn. 4, I. 
Beleeue not euerie fpirit^ but trie the fpirits^ whether they are 
of God ; for manie falfe prophets are gone 
out into the world, &c. 
1584

--- PAGE 61 ---
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
*:!: 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
Sis* 
** 
** 
** 
** 
^* 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
** 
SCOTS 
Difcovery of Witchcraft : 
PROVING 
The common opinions of Witches con- 
tracting with Divels, Spirits, or Familiars; and 
their power to kill, torment, and confume the bodies of 
men women, and children, or other creatures by difeafes 
or otherwife ; their flying in the Air, &c. To be but imaginary 
Erronious conceptions and novelties ; 
WHEREIN ALSO, 
The lewde unchriftian practifes of Witchmongers, upon aged, 
melancholy, ignorant, and fuperftious people in extorting con- 
feffions, by inhumane terrors and tortures is notably detedled. 
' The knavery and confederacy of Conjurors. 
The impious blafphemy of Inchanters. 
The impofture of Soothfayers, and InfideHty of Atheifts. 
A L S The delufion of Pythonilts, Figure-cafters, Aftrologers, and va- 
^ nity of Dreamers. 
The fruitleffe beggerly art of Alchimiftry. 
The horrible art of Poifoning and all the tricks and convey- 
ances of juggling and Liegerdemain are fully deciphered. 
With many Other things opened that have long lain hidden; though 
very neceffary to be known for the undeceiving of Judges, Juftices, 
and Juries, and for the prefervation of poor, aged, deformed, ignorant 
people ; frequently taken, arraigned, condemned and executed for 
Witches, when according to a right underftanding, and a good 
confcience, Phyfick, Food, and neceffaries should be 
adminiftred to them. 
Whereunto is added, a treatife upon the nature, and fubftance of Spirits and Divels, 
&c. all written and publiftied in Anno 1584. by Reginald Scot, Efquire. 
LONDON, 
Tr'mted hy Ric/iard Cotes. 165 1.

--- PAGE 63 ---
Size, Fol., loj in. x 64. 
THE 
Difcovery of Witchcraft: 
PROVING, 
That the Compacts and Contra(5ts of Witches 
with Devils and all Infernal Spirits or Familiars, are but 
Erroneous Novelties and Imaginary Conceptions. 
Alfo dif covering, How far their power extendeth, in Killing, Tormenting, 
Confuming, or Curing the bodies of Men, Women, Children, or Animals, 
by Charms, Philtres, Periapts, Pentacles, Curfes, and Conjurations. 
WHEREIN LIKEWISE 
The Unchriftian Pra(5tices and Inhumane Dealings of 
Searchers and Witch-trjers upon Aged, Melancholly, and Superftitious 
people, in extorting Confeffions by Terrors and Tortures, 
and in devifing falfe Marks and Symptoms, are notably Detected. 
And the Knavery oijuglers, Conjicrers, Charmers, Soothfayers,Figiire^Cafters, 
Dreamers, Alchymifts and Philterers; with many other things 
that have long lain hidden, fully Opened and Deciphered. 
ALL WHICH 
Are very neceffary to be known for the undeceiving of Jzidges, Jnftices, 
and Jurors, before they pafs Sentence upon Poor, Miferable and Ignorant People ; 
who are frequenly Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed for Witches and Wixxards. 
IN SIXTEEN BOOKS. 
By Reginald Scot Efquire. 
Whereunto is added 
An excellent Difcourfe of the Nattire and Subftance 
OF 
DEVILS and SPIRITS, 
IN 'TWO BOOKS: 
The Firft by the aforefaid Author: The Second now 
added in this Third Edition, as Succedaneous to the former, 
and conducing to the compleating of the Whole Work : 
With Nine Chapters at the beginning of the Fifteenth.* Book 
of the DISCOVERT. 
LONDON: 
Printed for A . Clark, and are to be fold by Dixy Page at the Turks-Head 
in Cornhill near the RoyaH Exchange, 1665.

--- PAGE 65 ---
To the Honorable, mine especiall good aa\. a. 
Lord, Sir Roger Manwood Knight, Lord 
cheefe Baron of Mr Majesties Court 
of the Eschequer. 
NSOMUCH as I know that your Lordship is by nature 
vvhollie incHned, and in purpose earnestly bent to releeve 
the poore, and that not onlie with hospitalitie and almes, 
but by diverse other devises and waies tending to their 
comfort, having (as it were) framed and set your selfe to the helpe and 
maintenance of their estate ; as appeareth by your charge and travell 
in that behalfe. Whereas also you have a speciall care for the sup- 
porting of their right, and redressing of their wrongs, as neither 
despising their calamitie, nor yet forgetting their complaint, seeking 
all meanes for their amendement, and for the reformation of their dis- 
orders, even as a verie father to the poore. Finallie, for that I am a 
poore member of that commonwelth, where your Lordship is a 
principall person; I thought this my travell, in the behalfe of the poore, 
the aged, and the simple, might be/ verie fitlie commended unto you : A.i\. v. 
for a weake house requireth a strong staie. In which respect I give 
God thanks, that hath raised up unto me so mightie afreend for/ thern A. v. 
as your Lordship is, who in our lawes have such knowledge, in 
government such discretion, in these causes such experience, and in 
the commonwealth such authoritie ; and neverthelesse vouchsafe to 
descend to the consideration of these base and inferior matters, which 
minister more care and trouble, than worldlie estimation. 
And in somuch as your Lordship knoweth, or rather exerciseth the 
office of a judge, whose part it is to heare with courtesie, and to 
determine with equitie ; it cannot but be apparent unto you, that when 
punishment exceedeth the fault, it is rather to be thought vengeance 
than correction. In which respect I knowe you spend more time and 
travell in the conversion and reformation, than in the subversion & 
confusion of offenders, as being well pleased to augment your 
owne private paines, to the end you may diminish their publike smart. 
For in truth, that commonwealth remaineth in wofull state, where 
fetters and halters beare more swaie than mercie and due com- 
passion. 
Howbeit, it is naturall to unnaturall people, and peculiar unto 
witchmongers, to pursue the poore, to accuse the simple, and to kill 
the innocent ; supplieng in rigor and malice towards others, that

--- PAGE 66 ---
Vlll 
The Epistle. 
which they themselves want in proofe and discretion, or the other in 
offense or occasion. But as a cruell hart and an honest mind doo 
seldome meete and feed togither in a dish ; so a discreet and mercifull 
magistrate, and a happie commonwealth cannot be separated asunder. 
How much then are we bound to God, who hath given us a Queene, 
that of justice is not only the very perfect image & paterne ; but also 
A. 2. of mercie & clemencie (under God) the meere fountaine &/ bodie it 
iii. selfe 
In somuch as they which hunt most after bloud in/ these 
daies, have least authoritie to shed it. Moreover, sith I see that in 
cases where lenitie might be noisome, & punishment wholesome to 
the commonwealth ; there no respect of person can move you, no 
authoritie can abash you, no feare, no threts can daunt you in per- 
forming the dutie of justice. 
In that respect againe I find your Lordship a fit person, to judge 
and looke upon this present treatise. Wherein I will bring before 
you, as it were to the barre, two sorts of most arrogant and wicked 
people, the first challenging to themselves, the second attributing unto 
'Apoc. 4, II. others, that power which onelie apperteineth to God,* who onelie is 
Ifts"' ^' Creator of all things,'' who onelie searcheth the heart and reines, 
Apoc. 2. vvho onelie knoweth our imaginations and thoughts, who onelie"* 
<> Dan. 2. & openeth all secrets, who^ onelie worketh great wonders, who onelie 
'Psalm 72 hath power' to raise up & cast downe ; who onelie maketh thunder, 
& 136. lightning, raine, tempests, and restraineth them at his pleasure ; who 
f John's. & 36 onelie^ sendeth life and death, sicknesse & health, wealth and wo; 
Sam. 12. ^jiQ neither giveth nor lendeth his'' glorie to anie creature. 
1. Reg. 8. ° ° 
2. Reg. 3. And therefore, that which greeveth me to the bottome of my hart, 
Zach. 10. is, that these witchmongers cannot be content, to wrest out of Gods 
^^4-^ hand his almightie power, and keepe it themselves, or leave it with a 
gjob. \. witch: but that, when by drift of argument they are made to laie 
Isaie. 42, 8. downe the bucklers, they yeeld them up to the divell, or at the least 
praie aid of him, as though the raines of all mens lives and actions 
were committed into his hand ; and that he sat at the sterne, to guide 
and direct the course of the whole world, imputing unto him power 
and abilitie inough to doo as great things, and as strange miracles as 
ever Christ did. 
A. 2. V. But the doctors of this supernaturall doctrine sale/ somtimes, that 
A. iii. V. the witch doth all these things by vertue of hir/ charmes ; sometimes 
that a spirituall, sometimes that a corporall divell doth accomplish it; 
sometimes they sale that the divell doth but make the witch beleeve 
she doth that which he himselfe hath wrought ; sometimes that the 
divell seemeth to doo that by compulsion, which he doth most 
willinglie. Finallie, the writers hereupon are so eloquent, and full of 
varietie ; that sometimes they write that the divell dooth all this by

--- PAGE 67 ---
The Epistle. 
IX 
Gods permission onelie ; sometimes by his licence, somtimes by his 
appointment : so as (in effect and truth) not the divell, but the high 
and mightie king of kings, and Lord of hosts, even God himselfe, 
should this waie be made obedient and servile to obeie and performe 
the will & commandement of a malicious old witch, and miraculouslie 
to answere hir appetite, as well in everie trifling vanitie, as in most 
horrible executions ; as the revenger of a doting old womans imagined 
wrongs, to the destruction of manie innocent children, and as a 
supporter of hir passions, to the undoing of manie a poore soule. 
And I see not, but a witch may as well inchant, when she will ; as a 
lier may lie when he list : and so should we possesse nothing, but by 
a witches licence and permission. 
And now forsooth it is brought to this point, that all divels, which 
were woont to be spirituall, may at their pleasure become corporall, 
and so shew themselves familiarlie to witches and conjurors, and to 
none other, and by them onlie may be made tame, and kept in a box, 
&c. So as a malicious old woman may command hir divell to plague 
hir neighbor : and he is afflicted in manner and forme as she desireth. 
But then commeth another witch, and she biddeth hir divell helpe, 
and he healeth the same partie. So as they/ make it a kingdome A 3 
divided in it selfe, and therefore I trust it will not long endure, but 
will shortlie be overthrowne, according to the words of our Savior, 
Onine regmim in se divisiim desolabihir, Everie king/dome divided in A. iiii. 
it selfe shalbe desolate. 
And although some saie that the divell is the witches instrument, 
to bring hir purposes and practises to passe : yet others saie that she 
is his instrument, to execute his pleasure in anie thing, and therefore 
to be executed. But then (me thinks) she should be injuriouslie dealt 
withall, and put to death for anothers offense : for actions are not 
judged by instrumentall causes ; neither dooth the end and purpose 
of that which is done, depend upon the meane instrument. Finallie, 
if the witch doo it not, why should the witch die for it 
But they saie 
that witches are persuaded, and thinke, that they doo indeed those 
mischeefs ; and have a will to performe that which the divell com- 
mitteth : and that therefore they are worthie to die. By which reason 
everie one should be executed, that wisheth evill to his neighbor, &c. 
But if the will should be punished by man, according to the offense 
against God, we should be driven by thousands at once to the 
slaughterhouse or butcherie. For whosoever loatheth correction Proverb. 5. 
shall die. And who should escape execution, if this lothsomnesse (I 
saie) should extend to death by the civill lawes. Also the reward of 
sinne is death. Howbeit, everie one that sinneth, is not to be put to 
death by the magistrate. But (my Lord) it shalbe proved in my 
b

--- PAGE 68 ---
X 
The Epistle. 
A 3 V 
Instit. lib. 
5. ca. 8. sect. 6. 
Item ul'on 
Deut. cap. 18. 
Lib. de la- 
miis, fag. 5. 
A. iiij. V. 
» Isaie. 59, 7. 
Rom. 3, 15. 
b Eccl. 27, 5. 
» Prov. 1, 16. 
d Jer. 2, 34. 
« Ps. 139, 15. 
Esai. 33, 15. A4 
[A. v.] 
/« epistola 
ad Jo. Wier. 
booke, and your Lordship shall trie it to be true, as well here at home 
in your native countrie, as also abrode in your severall circuits, that 
(besides them that be Vemjica, which are plaine poisoners) there will 
be found among our witches onelie two sorts ; the one sort being such 
by imputation, as/ so thought of by others (and these are abused, and 
not abusors) the other by acceptation, as being willing so to be 
accompted (and these be meere cousenors.) 
Calvine treating of these magicians, calleth them cousenors, saieng 
that they use their juggling knacks onelie to amase or abuse the 
people ; or else for fame : but he/ might rather have said for gaine. 
Erastus himselfe, being a principall writer in the behalfe of witches 
omnipotencie, is forced to confesse, that these Greeke words, fia'^i'a, 
fia^Cja'-ila, (pap^iaKt'a, are most commonlie put for illusion, false packing, 
cousenage, fraud, knaverie and deceipt : and is further driven to sale, 
that in ancient time, the learned were not so blockish, as not to see 
that the promises of magicians and inchanters were false, and no- 
thing else but knaverie, cousenage, and old wives fables ; and yet 
defendeth he their flieng in the aire, their transferring of corne or 
grasse from one feeld to another, &c. 
But as Erastus disagreeth herein with himselfe and his freends : so 
is there no agreement among anie of those writers, but onlie in 
cruelties, absurdities, and impossibilities. And these (my Lord) that 
fall into so manifest contradictions, and into such absurd assevera- 
tions, are not of the inferior sort of writers ; neither are they all 
papists, but men of such accompt, as whose names give more credit 
to their cause, than their writings. In whose behalfe I am sorie, and 
partlie for reverence suppresse their fondest errors and fowlest absur- 
dities ; dealing speciallie with them that most contend in crueltie,'' 
whose feete are swift to shed bloud, striving (as "^Jesus the sonne of 
Sirach saith) and hasting (as '^Salomon the sonne of David saith) to 
powre out the bloud of the innocent ; whose heat against these poore 
wretches cannot be allaied with anie other liquor than bloud. And 
therfore I feare that "^under their wings will be found the bloud of the 
soules of the poore, at that dale, when the Lord shall sale ;/ ^Depart 
from me ye bloudthirstie men. 
And bicause I know your Lordship will take no counsell against 
innocent bloud, but rather suppresse them that seeke to embrue their 
hands therein ; I have made choise to open their case unto you, and 
to laie their miserable calamitie before your feete : following herein 
the/ advise of that learned man Brentius, who saith ; Si quis adino- 
nuerit magistraiti})i, ne in miseras illas inulierculas saviat, etem ego 
arbitror divinitus excitaticvi ; that is. If anie admonish the magistrate 
not to deale too hardlie with these miserable wretches, that are called

