ted manie injurious executions ; 
whereby the popes themselves also might justlie be detected of error, 
contrarie to the catholike beleefe in that behalfe. Marrie he saith, 
that although the words and direct sense of this councell be quite 
contrarie to truth and his opinion ; yet he will make 
an exposition thereof, that shall somewhat mitigate 
the lewdnes of the same ; and this he saith 
is not onlie allowable to doo, but 
also meritorious. Marke 
the mans words, 
and judge his 
meaning;.

--- PAGE 151 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. iR. 
53 
Mai. Male/, 
pa. 1, cap. 3. 
Guli. Pari si. 
The xvii. Chapter. 
Wiichmongers reasons, to proove that witches can worke luondefs, 
Bodins tale of a Friseland preest transported, that hnaginations, 
proceedmg of melancholie doo cause illusions. 
PlD M. Maleficarum also saith, that the councels and 
doctors were all deceived heerein, and alledging authoritie 
therfore, confuteth that opinion by a notable reason, 
called Petitio principii, or rather, Ignottim per igno- 
iius, in this maner : They can put changlings in the place of 
other children ; Ergo they can transferre and transforme them- 
selves and others, &c : according to their confession in that behalfe. 
Item he saith, and Bodin justifieth it, that a preest in Friseland 
was corporallie transferred into a farre countrie, as witnessed 
another preest of Oberdorf his companion, who saw him aloft 
in the aire : Ergo saith M. Mai. they have all beene decei/ved 
hitherto, to the great impunitie of horrible witches. Wherein he 
opposeth his follie against God and his church, against the truth, and 
against all possibilitie. But surelie it is almost incredible, how 
imagination shall abuse such as are subject unto melancholie ; so as 
they shall beleeve they see, heare, and doo that, which never was 
nor shall be ; as is partlie declared, if you read Galen De locis 
affectis, and may more / plainelie appeere also if you read Aristotle 
De somnio. 
And thereof S. Augustine saith well, that he is too much a foole 
and a blockhead, that supposeth those things to be doone indeed, 
and corporallie, which are by such persons phantasticallie imagined : 
which phantasticall illusions do as well agree and accord (as Algerus Lib. i. cap. 7. 
saith) with magicall deceipts, as the veritie accompanieth divine 
holinesse. 
68. 
54. 
August, de 
spiritu &'anima. 
The xviii. Chapter. 
That the confession of witches is insufficient in civill and commoit 
lawe to take awaie life. What the sounder divines, and decrees 
of councels determine in this case. 
LAS ! what creature being sound in state of mind, 
would (without compulsion) make such maner of con- 
fessions as they do ; or would, for a trifle, or nothing^ 
make a perfect bargaine with the divell for hir soule, 
to be yeelded up unto his tortures and everlasting flames, and 
that within a verie short time ; speciallie being through age most 
It is not likelie 
they would so 
doo : Ergo a lie.

--- PAGE 152 ---
54 
3- Bookf 
The discoverie 
69. 
Aui^n^t. de ctTi't. 
Dci. hid or. lib. 
(g. <-,;/■. 9.) 
Etymol. 26. qua. 
5. ca. ncc 
itiirum. 
Poiizivibins de 
laniiis, volu»i. 
10. 
L. crr^r, L. 
cum f'cst. c. dc 
juris er facti 
i^nor. ac in L. 
dc crtat. §. item 
de intcrrog, 
actio. 
Per ghs. Bal. 
iir al/n-i ill L. 
I. c. dc loh/cs, 
g/os. Uc-c. SI dc 
confcs. in 6. § ad 
leg. Aquil L. 
Ncracius. §. fin. 
Ut tcr Bald. (sS 
August, in L. /, 
e. de confess, 
c. Extra.de 
fTcsuv:t. Utcrr.s. 
Per Bald, in d. 
leg. (Jc. 
Extra, de test 
cum Uteris. 
Mai. Malef.pa. 
3 qucest. 5. 65. 
cap. II. 
commonlie unlike to live one whole yeare ? The terror of hell 
fire must needs be to them diverslie manifested, and much more 
terrible ; bicause of their weaknesse, nature, and kind, than to any 
other: as it would appeere, if a witch were but asked, Whether 
she would be contented to be hanged one yeare hence, upon 
condition hir displesure might be wrekcd upon hir enimie pre- 
sentlie. As for theeves, & such other, they thinke not to go 
to hell fire; but are either persuaded there is no hell, or that 
their crime deserveth it not, or else that they have time e/nough 
to repent : so as, no doubt, if they were perfectlie resolved heereof, 
they would never make such adventures. Neither doo I thinke, that 
for any summe of monie, they would make so direct a bargaine to go 
to hell fire. Now then I conclude, that confession in this behalf is 
insufficient to take awaie the life of any body ; or to atteine such 
credit, as to be beleeved without further proofe. For as Aiifi;itsti>ie 
and Isidore, with the rest of the sounder divines sale, that these 
prestigious things, which are wrought by witches are fantasticall : so 
doo the sounder decrees of councels and canons agree, that in that 
case, there is no place for criminall action. And the lawe saith, that 
The confession of such persons as are illuded, must needs be 
erronious, and therefore is not to be admitted : for, Confessio 
debet tenere veriiin &^ possibile. But these things are opposite 
both to lawe and nature, and therfore it followcth not; Bicause these 
witches confesse so. Ergo it is so. For the confession differeth 
from the act, or from the possibilitie of the act. And whatsoever is 
contrarie to nature faileth in his principles, and therefore is naturallie 
impossible. 
The lawe also saith, In criininalibiis regidariter non stainr 
soli confessiofti rci, In criminall cases or touching life, we must not 
absolutelie stand to the confession of the accused partie : but in 
these matters proofes must be brought more cleare than the light it 
selfe. And in this crime no bodie must be condemned upon pre- 
sumptions. And where it is objected and urged, that Since God 
onelie knoweth the thoughts, therefore there is none other waie of 
proofe/ but by confession : It is answered thus in the lawe, to wit: 
Their confession in this case conteineth an outward act, and the same 
impossible both in lawe and nature, and also unlikelie to be true ; 
and therefore Quod verisimile non est, attetidi non debet. So 
as, though their confessions may be worthie of jjunishment, as 
whereby they shew a will to commit such mischeefe, yet not worthie 
of credit, as that they have such power. For, Hi factum absit, 
soldque opinions laborent, e sticltoriiin genere sunt ; If they con- 
fesse a fact performed but in opinion, they are to be reputed

--- PAGE 153 ---
of JVitchcraft. ci-.ip. i?- 55 
among the number of fooles. Neither may any man be by lawe con- 
demned for criminall causes, upon presumptions, nor yet by single 
witnesses : neither at the accusation of a capitall enimie, who indeed 
is not to be admitted to give evidence in this case ; though it please/ 70. 
M. Mai. and Bodin to affirme the contrarie. But beyond all equitie, 
these inquisitors have shifts and devises enow, to plague and kill 
these poore soules : for (they say) their fault is greatest of all others ; ^^f"^' ""^''-^ , 
bicause of their carnall copulation with the divell, and therefore they 
are to be punished as heretikes, foure maner of waies : to wit ; with 
excommunication, deprivation, losse of goods, and also with death. 
And indeede they find lawe, and provide meanes thereby to c.dcmaief.L. 
mainteine this their bloudie humor. For it is written in their popish 'l^'i"^^-jfipa"a,ui 
canons, that As for these kind of heretikes, how much soever they afflrmi-d by 
repent and returne to the faith, they may not be retemed alive, or kept 
in perpetuall prison ; but be put to extreame death. Yea, M. Mai. ^^^f^J"^^^^' 
writeth, that A witches sinne is the sinne against the Holie-ghost ; to 
wit, irremissible : yea further, that it is greater than the sinne of the 
angels that fell. In which respect I wonder, that Moses delivered not 
three tables to the children of Israeli ; or at the leastwise, that he ex- 
hibited not commandements for it. It is not credible that the greatest 
should be included in the lesse, Sac. 
But when these witchmongers are convinced in the objection 
concerning their confessions ; so as thereby their tyrannicall argu- 
ments cannot prevaile, to imbrue the magistrates hands in so much 
bloud as their appetite requireth : they fall to accusing them of other 
crimes, that the world might thinke they had some colour to 
mainteine their malicious furie against them. 
The xix. Chapter. 
Of foiire capitall crimes objected agaiitst witches, all fullie a?isicered 
and confuted as frivolotcs. 
IRST therefore they laie to their charge idolatrie. But i- Idoiatne, ron- 
alas without all reason : for such are properlie knowne 
to us to be idolaters, as doo externall worship to idols 
or strange gods. The furthest point that idolatrie can 
be stretched unto, is, that they, which are culpable therein, are 
such as hope for and seeke salvation at / the hands of idols, or of 7^- 
anie other than God ; or fix their whole mind and love upon 
anie creature, so as the power of God be neglected and con- 
temned thereby. But witches nei/ther seeke nor beleeve to have 5g. 
salvation at the hands of divels, but by them they are onlie 
deceived; the instruments of their phantasie being corrupted, and

--- PAGE 154 ---
56 
3- Booke. 
The discoverie 
2. Apostasie, 
confuted. 
3- Seducing of 
the people, 
confuied. 
4. Camall copu- 
lation with In- 
cubus, confuted. 
72. 
How the divell 
plaieth Succubus 
and Incubus. 
SO infatuated, that they suppose, confesse, and saie they can doo 
that, which is as farre beyond their power and nature to doo, as to 
kill a man at Yorke before noone, when they have beene seene at 
London in that morning, &c. But if these latter idolaters, whose 
idolatrie is spirituall, and committed onelie in mind, should be 
punished by death ; then should everie covetous man, or other, that 
setteth his affection anie waie too much upon an earthlie creature, be 
executed, and yet perchance the witch might escape scotfree. 
Secondlie, apostasie is laid to their charge, whereby it is inferred, 
that they are worthie to die. But apostasie is, where anie of sound 
judgement forsake the gospell, learned and well knowne unto them ; 
and doo not onelie imbrace impietie and infidelitie; but oppugne and 
resist the truth erstwhile by them professed. But alas these poore 
women go not about to defend anie impietie, but after good ad- 
monition repent. 
Thirdlie, they would have them executed for seducing the people. 
But God knoweth they have small store of Rhetorike or art to seduce ; 
except to tell a tale of Robin good-fellow be to deceive and seduce. 
Neither may their age or sex admit that opinion or accusation to be 
just : for they themselves are poore seduced soules. I for my part 
(as else-where I have said) have prooved this point to be false in 
most apparent sort. 
Fourthlie, as touching the accusation, which all the writers use 
herein against them for their carnall copulation with hiciihts : the 
follie of mens credulitie is as much to be woondered at and derided, as 
the others vaine and impossible confessions. For the divell is a 
spirit, and hath neither flesh nor bones, which were to be used in the 
performance of this action. And since he also lacketh all instruments, 
substance, and seed ingendred of bloud ; it were follie to staie over- 
long in the confutation of that, which is not in the nature of things. 
And yet must I saie somewhat heerein, bicause the opinion hereof is 
so stronglie and universallie received, / and the fables hereupon so in- 
numerable ; wherby M. Mai. Bodin, Hemingites, Hyperhis, Danaus^ 
£rashis, and others that take upon them to write heerein, are so abused, 
or rather seeke to abuse others ; as I woonder at their fond credulitie 
in this behalfe. For they affirme undoubtedlie, that the divell plaieth 
Succubus to the man, and carrieth from him the seed of generation, 
which he delivereth as Incubus to the woman, who manie 
times that waie is gotten with child ; which will 
verie naturallie (they saie) become a 
witch, and such a one they 
affirme Merline

--- PAGE 155 ---
of I'Vitchcraft. chap. :o. 57 
The XX. Chapter. 
A request io such readers as loath to heare or read filthie and 
bawdie matters ( which of necessitie are heere to be inserted) to 
passe over eight chapters. 
UT in so much as I am driven (for the more manifest ^ peroration to 
^ the readers. 
bevvraieng and displaieng of this most filthie and 
horrible error) to staine my paper with / writing thereon 57- 
certeine of their beastlie and bawdie assertions and 
examples, whereby they confirme this their doctrine (being my 
selfe both ashamed, and loth once to thinke upon such filthi- 
nesse, although it be to the condemnation thereof) I must intreat 
you that are the readers hereof, whose chaste eares cannot well 
endure to heare of such abhominable lecheries, as are gathered out of 
the bookes of those witchmongers (although doctors of divinitie, and 
otherwise of great authoritie and estimation) to turne over a few 
leaves, wherein (I saie) I have like a groome thrust their bawdie 
stuffe (even that which I my selfe loath) as into a stinking 
corner : howbeit, none otherwise, I hope, but 
that the other parts of my writing 
shall remaine sweet, and 
this also covered as 
close as may 
be./

--- PAGE 156 ---
58 
4- Booke. 
The discoverie 
73- 85. 
Mill. mule/, 
par. 2. cap. 4, 
qttirst. I. 
If his bodilie 
eies were out, he 
would see but 
ilfavoredlie. 
74- 
Nider iti forni- 
cario. 
T. Brabant in 
lib. de apib. 
^[ The fozLrth Booke. 
The first Chapter. 
Of ivi/chvtotigers opinions co7icerning evill spirits, how they frame 
themselves in tnore excellent sort than God made us. 
AMES SPRENGER and Henrie Institor, in M. Mai. 
agreing with Bodin, Earth. Spineus, Danceus, Eras- 
tus, Hetningiiis, and the rest, doo make a bawdie 
discourse ; labouring to proove by a fooHsh kind of 
philosophie, that evill spirits cannot onlie take earthlie forms 
and shapes of men ; but also counterfeit hearing, seeing, &c : and 
likewise, that they can eate and devoure meats, and also reteine, 
digest, and avoid the same : and finallie, use diverse kinds of activi- 
ties, but speciallie excell in the use and art of venerie. For M. Mai. 
saith, that The eies and eares of the mind are farre more subtill than 
bodilie eies or carnall eares. Yea it is there affirmed, that as they 
take bodies, and the likenesse of members ; so they take minds and 
similitudes of their operations. But by the way, I would have them 
answer this question. Our minds and soules are spirituall things. If 
our corporall eares be stopped, what can they heare or conceive of 
anie externall wisedome ? And truelie, a man of such a constitution 
of bodie, as they imagine of these spirits, which make themselves, 
&c : were of farre more excellent substance, &c : than the bodies of 
them that God made in paradise ; and so the divels workmanship 
should exceed the handie worke of God the father and creator of all 
things. / 
The second Chapter, 
Of bawdie Incubus and Succubus, and whether the action of 
venerie may be performed betweene witches and divels, and when 
witches first yeelded to Incubus. 
|eRETOFORE (they sale) Incubus was faine to ravish 
women against their will, untill Anno. 1400 : but now 
since that time witches consent willinglie to their 
 desires : in so much as some one witch exerciseth 
that trade of lecherie with Incubus twentie or thirtie yeares togither ; 
as was confessed by fourtie and eight witches burned at Ravenspurge.

--- PAGE 157 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 2. 59 
But what goodlie fellowes Incubus begetteth upon these witches, 
is prooved by Thomas of Aquine, Bodin, M. Mai. Hypcrius, in. scn.dist. 
S^c. , 
This is prooved first by the divels cunning, in discerning the dif- Gen. 6, 4. 
ference of the seed which falleth from men. Secondlie, by his under- 
standing of the aptnes of the women for the receipt of such seed. 
ThirdUe by his knowledge of the constellations, which are freendlie to 
such corporall effects. And lastlie, by the excellent complexion of 
such as the divell maketh choice of, to beget such notable personages 
upon, as are the/ causes of the greatnesse and excellencie of the child 59. 
thus begotten. 
And to proove that such bawdie dooings betwixt the divell and Ual. male/. 
witches is not fained, 'S>. Augusti7ie is alledged, who saith, that All ^^'u'gust.^de'^ 
superstitious arts had their beginning of the pestiferous societie doctrina Christ. 
betwixt the divell and man. Wherein he saith truelie ; for that in 
paradise, betwixt the divell and man, all wickednes was so contrived, 
that man ever since hath studied wicked arts : yea and the divell will 
be sure to be at the middle and at both ends of everie mischeefe. 
But that the divell ingendreth with a woman, in maner and forme 
as is supposed, and naturallie begetteth the wicked, neither is it true, 
nor Augustines meaning in this place. 
Howbeit M. Mai. proceedeth, affirming that All witches take/ their 75. 
beginning from such filthie actions, wherein the divell, in likenes of 
a prettie wench, lieth prostitute as Sucaibus to the man, and reteining 
his nature and seede, conveieth it unto the witch, to whome he deli- 
vereth it as Incubus. Wherein also is refuted the opinion of them 
that hold a spirit to be unpalpable. M. Mai. saith. There can be Mai. maU.f. 
rendred no infallible rule, though a probable distinction may be set i'"^- '• 
downe, whether Incubus in the act of venerie doo alwaies powre seed 
out of his assumed bodie. And this is the distinction ; Either she is 
old and barren, or yoong and pregnant. If she be barren, then dooth 
Incubus use hir without decision of seed ; bicause such seed should 
serve for no purpose. And the divell avoideth superfluitie as much 
as he may ; and yet for hir pleasure and condemnation togither, he 
goeth to worke with hir. But by the waie, if the divell were so com- 
pendious, what should he need to use such circumstances, even in 
these verie actions, as to make these assemblies, conventicles, cere- 
monies, &c : when he hath alreadie bought their bodies, and bar- 
gained for their soules ? Or what reason had he, to make them kill 
so manie infants, by whom he rather loseth than gaineth any thing ; 
bicause they are, so farre as either he or we knowe, in better case than 
we of riper yeares by reason of their innocencie ? Well, if she be not 
past children, then stealeth he seed awaie (as hath beene said) from

--- PAGE 158 ---
6o 
4. Booke. 
TJie discoverie 
Mai. male/, 
par. I. guce. i . 
Dancrus in 
dialog, de 
soriiariis. 
Ja. Sf-rtnger 
in Mai. male. 
some wicked man being about that lecherous busines, and therewith 
getteth yoong witches upon the old. 
And note, that they affirme that this businesse is better accomplished 
with seed thus gathered, than that which is shed in dremes, through 
superfluitie of humors : bicause that is gathered from the vertue of the 
seed generative. And if it be said that the seed will wax cold by the 
waie, and so lose his naturall heate, and consequentlie the vertue : 
M. Mai. Danceus, and the rest doo answere, that the divell can so 
Carrie it, as no heate shall go from it, &c. 
Furthermore, old witches are sworne to procure as manie yoong 
virgins for Incubus as they can, whereby in time they growe to be 
excellent bawds : but in this case the preest plaieth Inatbus. For 
you shall find, that confession to a preest, and namelie this word 
Benedicite, driveth Incubtis awaie, when Ave Maries, crosses, and all 
other charmes fade./ 
This was doone 
at Ravenspurge. 
60. yd. The third Chapter. 
Of the divels visible <&-» invisible dealing with witches in the waie 
of lecherie. 
jUT as touching the divels visible or invisible execution 
of lecherie, it is written, that to such witches, as before 
have made a visible legue with the preest, (the divell 
I should saie) there is no necessitie that Incubus should 
appeere invisible : marrie to the standers by hee is for the most 
part invisible. For proofe hereof James Sprenger and Institor 
affirme, that Manie times witches are seene in the fields, and 
woods, prostituting themselves uncovered and naked up to the navill, 
wagging and mooving their members in everie part, according to the 
disposition of one being about that act of concupiscence, and yet no- 
thing seene of the beholders upon hir ; saving that after such a con- 
venient time as is required about such a peece of worke, a blacke 
vapor of the length and bignesse of a man, hath beene seene as it 
were to depart from hir, and to ascend from that place. Neverthe- 
Mai. Male/. lesse, manie times the husband seeth Incubus making him cuckhold, 
in the likenesse of a man, and sometimes striketh off his head with 
his sword : but bicause the bodie is nothing but aire, it closeth 
togither againe : so as, although the goodwife be some times hurt 
thereby ; yet she maketh him beleeve he is mad or possessed, & that 
he dooth he knoweth not what. For she hath more pleasure and 
delight (they say) with Iticubus that waie, than with anie mortall 
man : whereby you may perceive that spirits are palpable. /

--- PAGE 159 ---
of Witchcraft. cbap. 4. 61 
The fourth Chapter. 77. 
That the power of generation is both outwardlie and inwardlie im- 
peached by witches, and of divers that had their genitals taken 
from them by witches, and by the satne meanes againe restored. 
]HEY also affirme, that the vertue of generation is 
impeached by witches, both inwardhe, and outward- 
lie : for intrinsecallie they represse the courage, and 
they stop the passage of the mans seed, so as it may 
not descend to the vessels of generation : also they hurt extrinse- 
callie, with images, hearbs, &c. And to proove this true, you shall 
heare certeine stories out o{ M. Mai. worthie to be noted. 
A yoong priest at Mespurge in the diocesse of Constance was be- Mai. MaUf. 
witched, so as he had no power to occupie any other or mo women '" 
than one ; and to be delivered out of that thraldom, sought to flie into 
another countrie, where he might use that preestlie occupation more 
freelie. But all in vaine ; for evermore he was brought as far back- 
ward by night, as he went forward in the daie before ; sometimes by 
land, sometimes in the aire, as though he flew. And if this be not 
true, I am sure that James Sprenger dooth lie. 
For the further confirmation of our beleefe in Incubics, M. Mai. 
citeth a storie of a notable matter executed at Ravenspurge, as true 
and as cleanlie/ as the rest. A yoong man lieng with a wench in that 61. 
towne (saith he) was faine to leave his instruments of venerie behind 
him, by meanes of that prestigious art of witchcraft : so as in that 
place nothing could be scene or felt but his plaine bodie. This yoong 
man was willed by another witch, to go to hir whom he suspected, 
and by faire or fowle meanes to require hir helpe : who soone after 
meeting with hir, intreated hir faire, but that was in vaine ; and there- 
fore he caught hir by the throte, and with a towell strangled hir, 
saieng : Restore me my/ toole, or thou shalt die for it : so as she being -jS. 
swolne and blacke in the face, and through his boisterous handling 
readie to die, said ; Let me go, and I will helpe thee. And whilest he 
was loosing the towell, she put hir hand into his codpeece, and 
touched the place ; saieng ; Now hast thou thy desire : and even at 
that instant he felt himselfe restored. 
Item, a reverend father, for his life, holinesse, and knowledge Ja- strmger. in 
notorious, being a frier of the order and companie of Spi7-e, reported, par. 2. qua. \. 
that a yoong man at shrift made lamentable moane unto him for the 
like losse : but his gravitie suffered him not to beleeve lightlie any 
such reports, and therefore madf the yoong man untrusse his cod- 
peece point, and sawe the complaint to be true and just. Whereupon

