on- 
ders ; for it will be easie for you to see or spie one card, which 
though you be perceived to doo, it will not be suspected, if you 
shuffle them well afterwards. And this note I must give you, that in 
reserving the bottome card, you must alwaies (whilest you shuffle) 
keepe him a little before or a little behind all the cards lieng under- 
neath him, bestowing him (I sale) either a little beyond his fellowes 
befoi-e, right over the forefinger, or else behind the rest, so as the little

--- PAGE 371 ---
of Witchcraft. cimp. 27. 273 
finger of the left hand may meete with it : which is the easier, the 
readier, and the better waie. In the beginning of your shuffling, shuffle 
as thicke as you can ; and in the end throw upon the stocke the nether 
card (with so manie mo at the least as you would have preserved for 
anie purpose) a little before or behind the rest. Provided alvvaies, that 
your forefinger, if the packe be laied before, or the little finger, if the 
packe lie be/hind, creepe up to meete with the bottome card, and not lie 333. 
betwixt the cards : and when you feele it, you may there hold it, untill 
you have shuffled over the cards againe, still leaving your kept card be- 
low. Being perfect herein, you may doo almost what you list with the 
cards. By this meanes, what packe soever you make, though it 
consist of eight, twelve, or twentie cards, you may keepe them still 
together unsevered next to the nether card, and yet shuffle them often 
to satisfie the curious beholders. As for example, and for brevities 
sake, to shew you diverse feats under one. 
Hoiv to deliver out fonre aces, and to convert them into 
foure knaves. 
MAke a packe of these eight cards ; to wit, foure knaves and 
foure aces : and although all the eight cards must lie immedi- 
atlie together, yet must ech knave and ace be evenlie severed, and 
the same eight cards must lie also in the lowest place of the bunch. 
Then shuffle them so, as alwaies at the second shuffling, or at least te'wei'^ad- 
wise at the end of your shuffling the said packe, and of the packe one vised in the 
, , , , , 1 shuffling of 
ace may lie nethermost, or so as you may know where he goeth and the bunch, 
lieth : and alwaies (I saie) let your foresaid packe with three or foure o^grshoot 
cards more lie unseparablie together immediatlie upon andwith that ace. your seife. 
Then using some speech or other devise, and putting your hands with 
the cards to the edge of the table to hide the action, let out privilie a 
peece of the second card, which is one of the knaves, holding/ foorth 235. 
the stocke in both your hands, and shewing to the slanders by the 
nether card (which is the ace or kept card) covering also the head or 
peece of the knave (which is the next card) with your foure fingers, 
draw out the same knave, laieng it downe on the table : then shuffle 
againe, keeping your packe whole, and so have you two aces lieng 
together in the bottome. And therfore, to reforme that disordered 
card, as also for a grace and countenance to that action, take off the 
uppermost card of the bunch, and thrust it into the middestof the 
cards ; and then take awaie the nethermost card, which is one of your 
said aces, and bestow him likewise. Then may you begin as before, 
shewing an other ace, and in steed thereof, laie downe an other knave: 
and so foorth, untill in steed of foure aces you/ have laied downe foure 334- 
N N

--- PAGE 372 ---
The discoverie 
knaves. The beholders all this while thinking that there lie foure 
aces on the table, are greatlie abused, and will marvell at the trans- 
formation. 
How to tell one what card he seeth in the bottome, when the 
same card is shuffled ittto the stocke. 
WHen you have scene a card privilie, or as though you marked it 
not, laie the same undermost, and shuffle the cards as before 
you are taught, till your card lie againe below in the bottome. Then 
shew the same to the beholders, willing them to remember it : then 
shuffle the cards, or let anie other shuffle them ; for you know the 
card alreadie, and therefore may at anie time tell them what card they 
^ ^ ^ saw : which* neverthelesse would be done with great circumstance and 
* For that . 
will drawe sheW of difficultlC. 
the action 
into the 
greater ad- 
An other waie to doo the same, having yotir self e indeed never 
scene the card. 
IF you can see no card, or be suspected to have scene that which 
you meane to shew, then let a slander by first shuffle, and after- 
wards take you the cards into your hands, and (having shewed and 
not seene the bottome card) shuffle againe, and keepe the same card, 
as before you are taught ; and either make shift then to see it when 
their suspicion is past, which maie be done by letting some cards fall, 
or else laie downe all the cards in heaps, remembring where you laid 
your bottome card. Then spie how manie cards lie in some one 
heape, and laie the heape where your bottome card is upon that 
heape, and all the other heapes upon the same : and so, if there were 
five cards in the heape wheron you laied your card, then the same 
must be the sixt card, which now you may throw out, or looke upon 
without suspicion : and tell them the card they saw. 
To tell one withotct confederacie what card he thinketh. 
LAie three cards on a table, a little waie distant, and bid a stander 
by be true and not waver, but thinke one of them three, and by 
wraieth the 
thought. his eie you shall assuredlie perceive which he both seeth and thinketh. 
335. And you shall doo the like, if you cast downe a whole/ paire of cards 
236. with the faces upward,/ wherof there will be few or none plainlie 
perceived, and they also coate cards. But as you cast them downe 
suddenlie, so must you take them up presentlie, marking both his eie 
and the card whereon he looketh.

--- PAGE 373 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 28. 
The xxviii. Chapter. 
How to tell what card ante man thitiketh, how to conveie the same 
into a kernell of a nut or cheristone, : and the satne againe 
into 07ies pocket : how to make one drawe the same or ante card 
you list, and all under one devise. 
IAKE a nut, or a cheristone, & burne a hole through the 
side of the top of the shell, and also through the kernell 
(if you will) with a hot bodkin, or boare it with a nail ; 
and with the eie of a needle pull out some of the kernell, 
so as the same may be as wide as the hole of the shell. Then write 
the number or name of a card in a peece of fine paper one inch or 
halfe an inch in length, and halfe so much in bredth, and roll it up 
hard : then put it into a nut, or cheristone, and close the hole with a 
little red waxe, and rub the same with a litle dust, and it will not be 
perceived, if the nut or cheristone be browne or old. Then let 
your confederate thinke that card which you have in your nut, &c : 
and either conveie the same nut or cheristone into some bodies 
pocket, or laie it in some strange place : then make one drawe the 
same out of the stocke held in your hand, which by use you may 
well doo. But saie not ; I will make you perforce draw such a 
card : but require some stander by to draw a card, saieng that it 
skils not what card he draw. And if your hand serve you to use 
the cards well, you shall prefer unto him, and he shall receive (even 
though he snatch at an other) the verie card which you kept, and 
your confederate thought, and is written in the nut, and hidden in 
the pocket, &c. You must (while you hold the stocke in your hands, 
tossing the cards to and fro) remember alwaies to keepe your card 
in your eie, and not to loose the sight thereof. Which feate, till 
you be perfect in, you may/ have the same privilie marked ; and when 
you perceive his hand readie to draw, put it a little out towards his 
hand, nimblie turning over the cards, as though you numbred them, 
holding the same more loose and open than the rest, in no wise suffer- 
ing him to draw anie other : which if he should doo, you must let three 
or foure fall, that you may beginne againe. IT This will seeme most 
strange, if your said paper be inclosed in a button, and by confederate 
sowed upon the doublet or cote of anie bodie. This tricke they com- 
monlie end with a nut full of inke, in which case some wag or unhappie 
boie is to be required to thinke a card ; and having so doone, let the 
nut be delivered him to cracke, which he will not refuse to doo, if he 
have seene the other feate plaied before./ 
Tricks with 
cards, &c : 
which must 
be doone 
with confe- 
deracie. 
336. 
A merrie 
conceipt, 
the like 
whereof 
you shall 
find in pag. 
324, & ?30.

--- PAGE 374 ---
276 
15 Booke. 
The discoverie 
237. 
The xxix. Chapter. 
Fast and 
loose with a 
handker- 
cher. 
337- 
Of fast or loose, how to knit a hard knot upon a handkercher, and 
to lendoo the same with words. 
HE Aegyptians iug^mg witchcraft or sortilegie standeth 
much in fast or loose, whereof though I have written 
somwhat generallie alreadie, yet having such oportunitie 
I will here shew some of their particular feats ; not 
treating of their common tricks which is so tedious, nor of their for- 
tune telling which is so impious ; and yet both of them meere 
cousenages. IT Make one plaine loose knot, with the two corner 
ends of a handkercher, and seeming to draw the same verie hard, hold 
fast the bodie of the said handkercher (neere to the knot) with your 
right hand, pulling the contrarie end with the left hand, which is the 
corner of that which you hold. Then close up handsomlie the knot, 
which will be yet somewhat loose, and pull the handkercher so with 
your right hand, as the left hand end may be neere to the knot : then 
will it seeme a true and a firme knot. And to make it appeare more 
assuredlie to be so indeed, let a stranger pull at the end which you hold 
in your left hand, whilest you hold fast the other in your right 
hand : and then holding the knot with your forefinger & thombe, 
& the nether part of your handkercher with your other fingers,/ 
as you hold a bridle when you would with one hand slip up the knot 
and lengthen your reines. This doone, turne your handkercher over 
the knot with the left hand, in dooing whereof you must suddenlie 
slip out the end or corner, putting up the knot of your handkercher 
with your forefinger and thombe, as you would put up the foresaid 
knot of your bridle. Then deliver the same (covered and wrapt in 
the middest of your handkercher) to one, to hold fast, and so after 
some words used, and wagers laied, take the handkercher and shake 
it, and it will be loose. 
Fast or lose 
with whip- 
cords and 
beades. 
A notable feate of fast or loose; tianielie, to pull three headstones 
from off a cord, while you hold fast the ends thereof ivithoict 
remoovine; of your ha7id. 
TAke two little whipcords of two foote long a peece, double 
them equallie, so as there may appeare foure ends. Then take 
three great headstones, the hole of one of them beeing bigger than 
the rest ; and put one beadstone upon the eie or bowt of the one

--- PAGE 375 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 30. 
cord, and an other on the other cord. Then take the stone with 
the greatest hole, and let both the bowts be hidden therein: which 
may be the better doone, if you put the eie of the one into the eie 
or bowt of the other. Then pull the middle bead upon the same, 
being doubled over his fellow, and so will the beads seeme to be 
put over the two cords without partition. For holding fast in each 
hand the two ends of the two cords, you may tosse them as you 
list, and make it seeme manifest to the beholders, which may not see 
how you have doone it, that the beadstons are put upon the two 
cords without anie fraud. Then must you seeme to adde more 
effectuall binding of those headstones to the string, and make one/ 
halfe of a knot with one of the ends of each side ; which is for no 238. 
other purpose, but that when the headstones be taken awaie, the This con- 
cords may be scene in the case which the beholders suppose them mist"be 
to be in before. For when you have made your halfe knot (which <;ioseiie 
, , , , , , , doone : Ergo 
m anie wise you may not double to make a perfect knot) you must it must be 
deliver into the hands of some stander by those two cords ; namelie, "e^s'wofke. 
two ends evenlie set in one hand, and two in the other, and then 
with a wager, &c : beginne to pull off your headstones, &c : which if 
you handle nimblie, and in the end cause him to pull his two ends, 
the two cords will/ shew to be placed plainelie, and the headstones 3^8. 
to have come through the cords. But these things are so hard and 
long to be described, that I will leave them ; whereas I could shew 
great varietie. 
The XXX. Chapter, 
Juggling knacks by confederacie, and how to know whether one 
cast crosse or pile by the ringing. 
JAIE a wager with your confederate (who must seeme 
simple, or obstinatlie opposed against you) that standing 
behind a doore, you will (by the sound or ringing of 
the monie) tell him whether he cast crosse or pile: so 
as when you are gone, and he hath fillipped the monie before the 
witnesses who are to be cousened, he must sale ; What is it, if it 
be crosse ; or What ist, if it be pile : or some other such signe, as 
you are agreed upon, and so you need not faile to gesse rightlie. 
By this meanes (if you have anie invention) you may seeme to doo 
a hundreth miracles, and to discover the secrets of a mans thoughts, 
or words spoken a far off. 
What is it ? 
What ist ? 
signes of 
confede- 
racie.

--- PAGE 376 ---
278 
13. Booke. 
The discoverie 
To make a shoale of goslings drawe a timber log. 
TO make a shoale of goslings, or (as they sale) a gaggle of geese 
to seeme to drawe a timber log, is doone by that verie meanes 
that is used, when a cat dooth drawe a foole through a pond or 
river : but handled somewhat further off from the beholders. 
Eleazers 
feate of c5- 
federacie. 
339- 
239. 
To make a pot or anie such thing standing fast on the cupboord, 
to fall downe thense by vertue of words. 
LEt a cupboord be so placed, as your confederate may hold a 
blacke thred without in the court, behind some window of that 
roome ; and at a certeine lowd word spoken by you, he may pull 
the same thred, being woond about the pot, &c. And this was the 
feate of Eleazar, which fosephus reporteth to be such a miracle./ 
To make one danse naked. 
MAke a poore boie confederate with you, so as after charmes, 
&c : spoken by you, he uncloth himselfe, and stand naked, 
seeming (whilest he undres/seth him) to shake, stampe, and crie, still 
hastening to be unclothed, till he be starke naked: or if you can procure 
none to go so far, let him onelie beginne to stampe and shake, &c: 
and to uncloth him, and then you may (for the reverence of the com- 
panie) seeme to release him. 
* As, Droch 
myroch, & 
senaroth 
betu ba- 
roch assma- 
aroth, rou- 
see faroun- 
see, hey 
passe passe, 
&c : or such 
like strange 
words. 
Pope and 
Tailor co- 
federates. 
[» ? then] 
To transforme or alter the colour of ones cap or hat. 
TAke a confederates hat, and use certeine *words over it, and 
deliver it to him againe, and let him seeme to be wroth, and 
cast it backe to you againe, affirming that his was a good new blacke 
hat, but this is an old blew hat, &c : and then you may seeme to 
countercharme it, and redeliver it, to his satisfaction. 
How to tell where a stollen horsse is become. 
BY meanes of confederacie, Steeven Tailor and one Pope abused 
divers countrie people. For Steeven Tailor would hide awaie his 
neighbours horsses, &c: and send them* to Pope, (whom he before had 
told where they were) promising to send the parties untohim, whomehe 
described and made knowne by divers signes ; so as this Pope would 
tell them at their first entrance unto the doore. Wherefore they came, 
and would saie that their horsses were stollen, but the theefe should

--- PAGE 377 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 31. 
be forced to bring backe the horsses, &c : and leave them within one 
mile south and by west, &c: of his house, even as the plot was laid, and 
the packe made before by Steeven and him. This Pope is said of some 
to be a witch, of others he is accompted a conjuror ; but commonlie 
called a wise man, which is all one with a soothsaier or witch./ 
The xxxi. Chapter. 
340. 
Boxes to alter one graine into another, or to consume the graine or 
come to nothing. 
HERE be divers juggling boxes with false bottoms, wherein 
manie false feates are wrought. First they have a box 
covered or rather footed alike at each end, the bottome 
of the one end being no deeper than as it may conteine 
one lane of corne or pepper glewed thereupon. Then use they to put 
into the hollow end thereof some other kind of graine, ground or un- 
ground ; then doo they cover it, and put it under a hat or candle- 
sticke : and either in putting it therinto, or pulling it thence, they 
turne the box, and open the contrarie end, wherein is shewed a con- 
trarie graine : or else they shew the glewed end first (which end they 
suddenlie thrust into a boll or bag of such graine as is glewed alreadie 
thereupon) and secondlie the emptie box./ 
Note the 
maner of 
this con- 
veiance. 
How to conveie {with words or charmes) the corne conteined in 
one box into an other. 
THere is another box fashioned like a bell, wherinto they doo put 
so much, and such corne or spice as the foresaid hollow box can 
conteine. Then they stop or cover the same with a peece of lether, 
as broad* as a tester, which being thrust up hard towards the midle 
part or waste of the said bell, will sticke fast, & beare up the corne. 
And if the edge of the leather be wet, it will hold the better. Then 
take they the other box dipped (as is aforesaid) in corne, and set downe 
the same upon the table, the emptie end upward, saieng that they will 
conveie the graine therein into the other box or bell : which being 
set downe somewhat hard upon the table, the leather and the corne 
therein will fall downe, so as the said bell being taken up from the 
table, you shall see the corne heng thereon, and the stopple will be 
hidden therwith, & covered : & when you uncover the other box, 
nothing shall remaine therein. But presentlie the corne must be 
swept downe with one hand into the other, or into your lap or hat. 
240. 
[»= thick] 
You must 
take heed 
that when 
the corne 
commeth 
out it cover 
& hide the 
leather, &c.

--- PAGE 378 ---
28o 13- Booke. The discovei'ie 
Manie feats maie be done with this box, as to put therein a tode, 
affirming the same to have beene so turned from corne, &c: and then 
341. manie beholders will/ suppose the same to be the jugglers divell, 
whereby his feats and miracles are wrought. But in truth, there is 
more cunning witchcraft used in transferring of corne after this sort, 
than is in the transferring of one mans corne in the grasse into an 
» See the 12 Other mans feeld : which* the lawe of the twelve tables dooth so 
this'd^is''co- forceablie condemne : for the'one is a cousening slight, the other is a 
verie, in the falsC lie. 
title Habar, 
cap. 4. pag. 
Of an other boxe to convert wheat into flower with, words, 
THere is an other boxe usual! among jugglers, with a bottome in 
the middle thereof, made for the like purposes. One other also 
like a tun, wherin is shewed great varietie of stuffe, as well of liquors 
as spices, and all by means of an other little tun within the same, 
wherein and whereon liquors and spices are shewed. But this would 
aske too long a time of descripton. 
Of diverse petie ju^s;gling knacks. 
These are ' I "Here are manie other beggerlie feats able to beguile the simple, 
such sleights J. as to make an ote stir by spetting thereon, as though it 
bungler" Came to passe by words. Item to deliver meale, pepper, ginger, or 
thern'?''and ^v{\t. powder out of the mouth after the eating of bread, &c: which is 
yet prettie, doone by rcteining anie of those things stuffed in a little paper or 
bladder conveied into your mouth, and grinding the same with your 
teeth. % Item, a rish through a peece of a trencher, having three 
holes, and at the one side the rish appearing out in the second, at the 
other side in the third hole, by reason of a hollow place made 
betwixt them both, so as the slight consisteth in turning the peece of 
trencher./ 
241. The xxxii. Chapter. 
To burne a thred, and to make it whole agaiiie with the ashes 
thereof. 
T is not one of the woorst feats to burne a thred hand- 
somelie, and to make it whole againe : the order whereof 
is this. Take two threds, or small laces, of one foote in 
length a peece : roll up one of/ them round, which will be 
then of the quantitie of a pease, bestow the same betweene your left 
Marke the 
maner of 
this con- 
ceit and de- 
vise.

--- PAGE 379 ---
of Witchc7^aft. 
Chap. 32. 281 
forefinger and your thombe. Then take the other thred, and hold it 
foorlh at length, betwixt the forefinger and thombe of each hand, 
holding all your fingers deintilie, as yong gentlewomen are taught to 
take up a morsell of meate. Then let one cut asunder the same thred Thm is, 
in the middle. When that is doone, put the tops of your two thombes ddntlue." 
together, and so shall you with lesse suspicion receive the peece of 
thred which you hold in your right hand into your left, without opening 
of your left finger and thombe : then holding these two peeces as you 
did the same before it was cut, let those two be cut also asunder in 
the middest, and they conveied againe as before, untill they be cut 
verie short, and then roll all those ends together, and keepe that ball 
of short threds before the other in your left hand, and with a knife 
thrust out the same into a candle, where you may hold it untill the 
said ball of short threds be burnt to ashes. Then pull backe the 
knife with your right hand, and leave the ashes with the other ball 
betwixt the forefinger and thombe of your left h and, and with the two 
thombs & two forefingers together seeme to take paines to frot and 
rub the ashes, untill your thred be renewed, and drawe out that thred A thred cut 
at length which you kept all this while betwixt your left finger and peeces and 
thombe. This is not inferior to anie jugglers feateif it be well handled, arhes'^mlTde 
for if you have legierdemaine to bestowe the same ball of thred, and to whole a- 
change it from place to place betwixt your other fingers (as may 
easilie be doone) then will it seeme verie strange. 
To cut a lace asunder i7i the middest^ and to make it whole againe. 
BY a devise not much unlike to this, you may seeme to cut 
asunder any lace that hangeth about ones necke, or any point, 
girdle, or garter, &c : and with witchcraft or conjuration to 
make it whole and closed together againe. For the accomplish- 
ment whereof, provide (if you can) a peece of the lace, &c : which J.|^^^^ 
you meane to cut, or at the least a patterne like the same, one 
inch and a halfe long, & (keeping it double privilie in your left 
hand, betwixt some of your fingers neere to the tips thereof) take the 
other lace which you meane to cut, still hanging about ones necke,/ 
and drawe downe your said left hand to the bought thereof: and 343- 
putting your owne peece a little before the other (the end or rather 
middle whereof you must hide betwixt your forefinger and thombe) 
making the eie or bought, which shall be seene, of your owne patterne, 
let some stander by cut the same a/sunder, and it will be surelie 242. 
thought that the other lace is cut ; which with words and froting, 
&c : you shall seeme to renew & make whole againe. This, if it be 
well handled, will seeme miraculous. 
O O

