ocent bloud, but rather suppresse them that seeke to embrue their 
hands therein ; I have made choise to open their case unto you, and 
to laie their miserable calamitie before your feete : following herein 
the/ advise of that learned man Brentius, who saith ; Si quis adino- 
nuerit magistraiti})i, ne in miseras illas inulierculas saviat, etem ego 
arbitror divinitus excitaticvi ; that is. If anie admonish the magistrate 
not to deale too hardlie with these miserable wretches, that are called

--- PAGE 69 ---
The Epistle. 
xi 
witches, I thinke him a good instrument raised up for this purpose by 
God himselfe. 
But it will perchance be said by witchmongers ; to wit, by such as 
attribute to witches the power which apperteineth to God onelie, that 
I have made choise of your Lordship to bea patrone to this my booke; 
bicause I think you favour mine opinions, and by that meanes may 
the more freelie publish anie error or conceipt of mine owne, which 
should rather be warranted by your Lordships authoritie, than by the 
word of God, or by sufficient argument. But I protest the contrarie, 
and by these presents I renounce all protection, and despise all freend- 
ship that might serve to helpe towards the suppressing or supplanting 
of truth : knowing also that your Lordship is farre from allowing anie 
injurie done unto man ; much more an enimie to them that go about 
to dishonor God, or to embezill the title of his immortall glorie. But 
bicause I know you to be perspicuous, and able to see downe into the 
depth and bottome of causes, and are not to be carried awaie with the 
vaine persuasion or superstition either of man, custome, time, or 
multitude, but mooved with the authoritie of truth onlie : I crave 
your countenance herein, even so farre foorth, and no further, than 
the lawe of God, the lawe of nature, the lawe of this land, and the/ rule A 4 v 
of reason shall require. Neither doo I treat for these poore people 
anie otherwise, but so, as with one hand you may sustaine the good, 
and with the other suppresse the evill : wherein you shalbe thought a 
father to orphans, an advocate to widowes, a guide to the blind, a 
staie to the lame, a comfort & countenance to the honest, a scourge/ 
and terror to the wicked. v. ».] 
Thus farre I have beene bold to use your Lordships patience, being 
offended with my selfe, that I could not in brevitie utter such matter 
as I have delivered amplie: whereby (I confesse) occasion of tedious- 
nes might be ministred, were it not that your great gravitie joined 
with your singular constancie in reading and judging be means of 
the contrarie. And I wish even with all my hart, that I could make 
people conceive the substance of my writing, and not to misconstrue 
anie part of my meaning. Then doubtles would I persuade my selfe, 
that the companie of witchmongers, &c : being once decreased, the 
number also of witches, &c : would soone be diminished. But true 
be the words of the Poet,* [ » Homer.] 
Haitdqiiaqtcam poteris sortirier omnia solus, 
Ndinque aliis divi bello pollere dederimt, 
Htiic saltandi artem, voce huic cythardque canendi : 
Riirswn alii insertiit sagax in pecto7-e magnus 
Jupiter ingenium, &-'c.

--- PAGE 70 ---
xii 
The Epistle. 
And therefore as doubtfull to prevaile by persuading, though I have 
reason and common sense on my side ; I rest upon earnest wishing ; 
namelie, to all people an absolute trust in God the creator, and not 
in creatures, which is to make flesh our arme : that God may 
have his due honor, which by the undutifulnes of mania 
is turned into dishonor, and lesse cause of offense 
and errour given by common received evill 
example. And to your Lordship I wish, as 
increase of honour, so continu- 
ance of good health, 
and happie 
daies. 
Your Lordships to be commanded 
Reginald Scot.

--- PAGE 71 ---
The Epistle. 
xiii 
To the right worshipfull Sir ^- " 
Thomas Scot Knight, S^c. 
[Rom. and Ital. of this reversed from original.] 
Ir, I see among other malefactors manie poore old women 
convented before you for working of miracles, other 
wise called witchcraft, and therefore I thought you also a 
meet person to whom I might comend my booke. And 
here 1 have occasion to speake of your sincere administration of justice, 
and of your dexteritie, discretion, charge, and travell emploied in that 
behalfe, wherof I am oculatus testis. Howbeit I had rather refer the 
reader to common fame, and their owne eies and eares to be satisfied y 
than to send them to a. Stationers shop, where manie times lies are 
vendible, and truth contemptible. For I being of your house, of your 
name, & of your bloudy my foot being under your table, my hand in 
your dish, or rather in your pursse, might bee thought to flatter you in 
that, wherein (I knowe) I should rather offend you than please you. 
And what need I currie favour with my most assured friend ? And if 
I should onelie publish those vertues (though they be manie) which 
give me speciall occasion to exhibit this my travell unto you, I should 
doo as a painter, that describeth the foot of a notable personage, and 
leaveth all the best features in his bodie untouched. 
I therefore (at this time) doo onelie desire you to consider of my 
report, concerning the evidence that is commonlie brought before you 
against them. See first whether the evidence be not frivolous, & 
whether the proofs brought against them be not incredible, consisting 
of ghesses, presumptions, & impossibilities contrarie to reason, scrip-/ 
ture, and nature. See also what persons complaine upon them, A a 2 
whether they be not of the basest, the unwisest, & most faithles kind 
of people. Also/ may it please you to waie what accusations and \A. vi. ■o.\ 
crimes they laie to their charge, namelie : She was at my house of 
late, she would have had a pot of milke, she departed in a chafe 
bicause she had it not, she railed, she curssed, she mumbled and 
whispered, and finallie she said she would be even with me : and 
soone after my child, my cow, my sow, or my pullet died, or was 
strangehe taken. Naie (if it please your Worship) I have further 
proofe : I was with a wise woman, and she told me I had an ill 
neighbour, & that she would come to my house yer it were long, and 
so did she ; and that she had a marke above hir waste, & so had she: 
and God forgive me, my stomach hath gone against hir a great while. 
Hir mother before hir was counted a witch, she hath beene beaten

--- PAGE 72 ---
xiv 
The Epistle. 
An 2 
lA . vii.] 
John. s. 
Prov. 15,1. 
Acts. 3. 
Proverbs. 9. 
Matth. 25. 
Matth. 5. 
Luke. 8. 
and scratched by the face till bloud was drawne upon hir, bicause she 
hath beene suspected, & afterwards some of those persons were 
said to amend. These are the certeinties that I heare in their evi- 
dences. 
Note also how easilie they may be brought to confesse that which 
they never did, nor lieth in the power of man to doo : and then see 
whether I have cause to write as I doo. Further, if you shall see 
that infidelitie, poperie, and manie other manifest heresies be backed 
and shouldered, and their professors animated and hartened, by 
yeelding to creatures such infinit power as is wrested out of Gods 
hand, and attributed to witches : finallie, if you shall perceive that I 
have faithfullie and trulie delivered and set downe the condition and 
state of the witch, and also of the witchmonger, and have confuted 
by reason and lawe, and by the word of God it selfe, all mine adver- 
saries objections and ai-guments : then let me have your countenance 
against them that maliciouslie oppose themselves against me./ 
My greatest adversaries are yoong ignorance and old custome. 
For what follie soever tract of time hath fostered, it is/ so supersti- 
tiouslie pursued of some, as though no error could be acquainted with 
custome. But if the lawe of nations would joine with such custome, to 
the maintenance of ignorance, and to the suppressing of knowledgey 
the civilest countrie in the world would soone become barbarous, &c. 
For as knowledge and time discovereth errors, so dooth superstition 
and ignorance in time breed them. And concerning the opinions of 
such, as wish that ignorance should rather be mainteined, than know- 
ledge busilie searched for, bicause thereby offense may grow : I 
answer, that we are commanded by Christ himselfe to search for 
knowledge : for it is the kings honour (as Salomon saith) to search 
out a thing. 
Aristotle said to Alexander, that a mind well furnished was more 
beautifuU than a bodie richlie araied. What can be more odious to 
man, or offensive to God, than ignorance : for through ignorance the 
Jewes did put Christ to death. Which ignorance whosoever forsaketh, 
is promised life everlasting : and therfore among Christians it should 
be abhorred above all other things. For even as when we wrestle 
in the darke, we tumble in the mire, &c : so when we see not the 
truth, we wallow in errors. A blind man may seeke long in the rishes 
yer he find a needley and as soone is a doubt discussed by ignorance. 
Finallie, truth is no sooner found out in ignorance, than a sweet savor 
in a dunghill. And if they will allow men knowledge, and give them 
no leave to use it, men were much better be without it than have it. 
For it is, as to have a tallent, and to hide it under the earthy or to 
put a candle under a bushell : or as to have a ship, & to let hir lie

--- PAGE 73 ---
The Epistle. 
XV 
alwaies in the docke : which thing how profitable it is, I can saie 
somewhat by experience./ 
But hereof I need saie no more, for everie man seeth that A a 2 v 
none can be happie who knoweth not what felicitie meaneth. 
For what availeth it to have riches, and not to have the use/ 
thereof? Trulie the heathen herein deserved more commen- \_a.v\\.v.\ 
dation than manie christians, for they spared no paine, no cost, nor 
travel! to atteine to knowledge. Pythagoras travelled from Thamus 
to Aegypt, and afterwards into Crete and Lacedasmonia : and Plato 
out of Athens into Italie and Aegypt, and all to find out hidden 
secrets and knowledge : which when a man hath, he seemeth to be 
separated from mortalitie. For pretious stones, and all other crea- 
tures of what value soever, are but counterfeits to this jewell : they 
are mortall, corruptible, and inconstant/ this is immortall, pure 
and certeine. Wherfore if I have searched and found out any 
good thing, that ignorance and time hath smothered, 
the same I commend unto you : to whom 
though I owe all that I have, yet am 
I bold to make other par- 
takers with you in 
this poore 
gift. 
Reg. Scot.

--- PAGE 74 ---
xvi 
T/ie Epistle. 
viii]. 
A a 3 
[* = wooden] 
A a 3 V. 
[A. viii. Z).] 
To the right worshipfull his loving friends, 
Maister Doctor Coldwell Deane of Ro- 
chester, and Maister Doctor Read- 
man Archdeacon of Can- 
turburie, Sr'c. 
[Rom. and Ital. reversed ; the italics of original smaller than in that to Sir Th. Scot.J 
I'Aving found out two such civill Magistrates, as for 
direction of judgement, and for ordering matters con- 
cerning justice in this common wealth (in my poore 
opinion) are verie singular persons, who (I hope) will 
accept of my good will, and examine my booke by their experience, 
as unto whom the matter therin conteined dooth greatlie apperteine: 
I have now againe considered of two other points : namelie, divinitie 
and philosophic, whereupon the groundworke of my booke is laid. 
Wherein although I know them to be verie sufficientlie informed, 
yet dooth not the judgement and censure of those causes so properlie 
apperteine to them as unto you, whose fame therein hath gotten 
preeminence above all others that I know of your callings : and in 
that respect I am bold to joine you with them, being all good neigh- 
bours togither in this commonwelth, and loving friends unto me. 
I doo not present this unto you, bicause it is meet for youy but for 
that you are meet for it (I meane) to judge upon it, to defend it, and 
if need be to correct ity knowing that you have learned of that grave 
counseller Cato, not to shame or discountenance any bodie. For if 
I thought you as readie, as able, to disgrace me for mine insufficien- 
ciey I should not have beene hastie (knowing your learning) to have 
written unto you : but if I should be abashed to write to you, I should 
shew my selfe ignorant of your courtesie. 
I knowe mine owne weakenesse, which if it have beene able to 
mainteine this argument, the cause is the stronger. Eloquent words 
may please the eares, but sufficient matter persuadeth the hart. So 
as, if I exhibit wholsome drinke (thought it be small) in a treene* 
dish with a faithfull hand, I hope it will bee as well accepted, as 
strong wine offered in a silver bowle with a flattering heart. And 
surelie it is a point of as great liberalitie to receive a small thing 
thankeful/he, as to give and distribute great and costlie gifts bounti- 
fullie : for there is more supplied with courteous answers than with 
rich rewards. The ty/rant Dionysius was not so hated for his 
tyrannie, as for his churlish and strange behaviour. Among the 
poore Israelites sacrifices, God was satisfied with the tenth part of

--- PAGE 75 ---
The Epistle. 
xvii 
an Ephah of flower, so as it were fine and good. Christ liked well 
of the poore widowes mite, Lewis of France accepted a rape root of 
clownish Conan, Cyrus vouchsafed to drinke a cup of cold water out 
of the hand of poore Sinsetes / and so it may please you to accept 
this simple booke at my hands, which I faithfullie exhibit unto you, 
not knowing your opinions to meet with mine, but knowing your 
learning and judgement to be able as well to correct me where I 
speake herein unskilfullie, as others when they speake hereof ma- 
liciouslie. 
Some be such dogs as they will barke at my writings, whether I 
mainteine or refute this argument : as Diogenes snarled both at the 
Rhodians and at the Lacedaemonians : at the one, bicause they were 
bravey at the other, bicause they were not brave. Homer himselfe 
could not avoid reprochfull speaches. I am sure that they which 
never studied to learne anie good thing, will studie to find faults 
hereat. I for my part feare not these wars, nor all the adversaries I 
havey were it not for certeine cowards, who (I knowe) will come 
behind my backe and bite me. 
But now to the matter. My question is not (as manie fondlife 
suppose) whether there be witches or naie : but whether they can 
doo such miraculous works as are imputed unto them. Good Mais- 
ter Deane, is it possible for a man to breake his fast with you at 
Rochester, and to dine that day at Durham with Maister Doctor 
Matthewy or can your enimie maime you, when the Ocean sea is 
betwixt you ? What reall communitie is betwixt a spirit and a bodie ? 
May a spirituall bodie become temporall at his pleasure ? Or may a 
carnall bodie become invisible 1 Is it likelie that the lives of all 
Princes, magistrates, & subjects, should depend upon the will, or 
rather upon the wish of a poore malicious doting old fooley and that 
power exempted from the wise, the rich, the learned, the godlie, &c ? 
Finallie, is it possible for man or woman to do anie of those miracles 
expressed in my booke, & so constantlie reported by great clarks ? 
If you sale, noy then am I satisfied. If you saie that God, abso- 
lutelie, or by meanes can accomplish all those, and manie more, I 
go with you. But witches may well saie they can doo these things, 
howbeit they cannot shew how they doo them. If I for my part 
should saie I could doo/ those things, my verie adversaries would saie A a 4' 
that I lied. 
O Maister Archdeacon, is it not pitie, that that which is said to be 
doone with the almightie power of the most high God, and by our 
saviour his onelie Sonne Jesus Christ our Lord, shouldbe referred to 
a baggage old womans nod/ or wish, &c ? Good Sir, is it not one B. i. 
manifest kind of Idolatrie, for them that labor and are laden, to come 
c

--- PAGE 76 ---
xviii 
The Epistle. 
unto witches to be refreshed ? If witches could helpe whom they 
are said to have made sicke, I see no reason, but remedie might as 
well be required at their hands, as a pursse demanded of him that 
hath stolne it. But trulie it is manifold idolatrie, to aske that of a 
creature, which none can give but the Creator. The papist hath 
some colour of scripture to mainteine his idoU of bread, but no 
Jesuiticall distinction can cover the witchmongers idolatrie in this 
behalfe. Alas, I am sorie and ashamed to see how manie die, that 
being said to be bewitched, onelie seeke for magicall cures, whom 
wholsome diet and good medicines would have recovered. I dare 
assure you both, that there would be none of these cousening kind 
of witches, did not witchmongers mainteine them, followe them, and 
beleeve in them and their oracles : whereby indeed all good learning 
and honest arts are overthrowne. For these that most advance their 
power, and mainteine the skill of these witches, understand no part 
thereof : and yet being manie times wise in other matters, are made 
fooles by the most fooles in the world. 
Me thinks these magicall physicians deale in the commonwelth, 
much like as a certeine kind of Cynicall people doo in the church, 
whose severe saiengs are accompted among some such oracles, as 
V may not be doubted ofy who in stead of learning and authoritie 
(which they make contemptible) doo feed the people with their owne 
devises and imaginations, which they prefer before all other divinitie : 
and labouring to erect a church according to their owne fansies, 
wherein all order is condemned, and onelie their magicall words and 
curious directions advanced, they would utterlie overthrowe the true 
Church. And even as these inchanting Paracelsians abuse the 
people, leading them from the true order of physicke to their 
charmes : so doo these other (I sale) dissuade from hearkening to 
learning and obedience, and whisper in mens eares to teach them 
their frierlike traditions. And of this sect the cheefe author at this 
A a4 V time is/ one Browne, a fugitive, a meet cover for such a cup : as here- 
["Arians] tofore the Anabaptists, the Arrians,* and the Franciscane friers. 
Trulie not onlie nature, being the foundation of all perfection/ 
but also scripture, being the mistresse and director thereof, and of 
all christianitie, is beautified with knowledge and learning. For as 
nature without discipline dooth naturallie incline unto vanities, and 
Rom. 2, 27. as it were sucke up errors : so doth the word, or rather the letter of 
2. Cor. 3, 6. scripture, without understanding, not onlie make us devoure 
errors, but yeeldeth us up to death & destruction : & therefore 
Paule saith he was not a minister of the letter, but of the spirit. 
Thus have I beene bold to deliver unto the world, and to you, those 
B. i. V. simple/ notes, reasons, and arguments, which I have devised or col-

--- PAGE 77 ---
The Epistle. 
XIX 
lected out of other authors : which I hope shall be hurtful! to none, 
but to my selfe great comfort, if it may passe with good liking and 
acceptation. If it fall out otherwise, I should thinke my paines ill 
imploied. For trulie, in mine opinion, whosoever shall performe any 
thing, or atteine to anie knowledge/ or whosoever should travell 
throughout all the nations of the world, or (if it were possible) should 
peepe into the heavens, the consolation or admiration thereof were 
nothing pleasant unto him, unles he had libertie to impart his know- 
ledge to his friends. Wherein bicause I have made speciall choise 
of you, I hope you will read it, or at the least laie it up in your studie 
with your other bookes, among which there is none dedicated 
to any with more good will. And so long as you 
have it, it shall be unto you (upon adven- 
ture of my life) a certeine amulet, 
periapt, circle, charme, &c : 
to defend you from 
all inchant- 
ments. 
Your loving friend 
Reg. Scot.

--- PAGE 78 ---
B. ii. B 
To the Readers. 
O you that are wise & discreete few words may suffice : 
for such a one judgeth not at the first sight, nor reproov- 
Jsai- II- eth by heresaie : but patientlie heareth, and thereby 
Prover. I. IC^Sot Ss^fS . , . , ,. , . , . , . , 
increaseth in understanding : which patience bringeth 
foorth experience, whereby true judgement is directed. I shall not 
need therefore to make anie further sute to you, but that it would 
please you to read my booke, without the prejudice of time, or former 
conceipt : and having obteined this at your hands, I submit my selfe 
unto your censure. But to make a solemne sute to you that are 
parciall readers, desiring you to set aside parcialitie, to take in good 
part my writing, and with indifferent eies to looke upon my booke, 
were labour lost, and time ill imploied. For I should no more pre- 
vaile herein, than if a hundred yeares since I should have intreated 
your predecessors to beleeve, that Robin goodfellowe, that great and 
ancient bulbegger, had beene but a cousening merchant, and no 
divell indeed. 
If I should go to a papist, and saie ; I praie you beleeve my 
writings, wherein I will proove all popish charmes, conjurations, 
exorcismes, benedictions and cursses, not onelie to be ridiculous, 
and of none effect, but also to be impious and contrarie to Gods 
word : I should as hardlie therein win favour at their hands, as here- 
.B. iiv. in obteine credit at yours. Neverthelesse, I doubt not, but to/ use 
the matter so, that as well the massemoonger for his part, as the 
witchmoonger for his, shall both be ashamed of their professions. 
But Robin goodfellowe ceaseth now to be much feared, and poperie 
is sufficientlie discovered. Nevertheles, witches charms, and con- 
jurors cousenages are yet thought effectuall. Yea the Gentiles have 
espied the fraud of their cousening oracles, and our cold prophets 
and inchanters make us fooles still, to the shame of us all, but 
speciallie of papists, who conjure everie thing, and thereby bring to 
passe nothing. They saie to their candles ; I conjure you to endure 
for ever : and yet they last not a pater noster while the longer. They 
conjure water to be wholesome both for bodie and soule : but the 
bodie (we see) is never the better for it, nor the soule anie whit

--- PAGE 79 ---
The Epistle. 
XXI 
reformed by it. And therefore I mervell, that when they see their 
owne conjurations confuted and brought to naught, or at the least 
void of effect, that they (of all other) will yet give such credit, counte- 
nance, and authoritie to the vaine cousenages of witches and con- 
jurors ; as though their charmes and conjurations could produce more/ 
apparent, certeine, and better effects than their owne. B v 
But my request unto all you that read my booke shall be no more, 
but that it would please you to conferre my words with your owne 
sense and experience, and also with the word of God. If you find 
your selves resolved and satisfied, or rather reformed and qualified 
in anie one point or opinion, that heretofore you held contrarie to 
truth, in a matter hitherto undecided, and never yet looked into ; I 
praie you take that for advantage : and suspending your judgement, 
staie the sentence of condemnation against me, and consider of the 
rest, at your further leasure. If this may not suffice to persuade you, 
it cannot prevaile to annoy you : and then, that which is written with- 
out offense, may be overpassed witliout anie greefe. 
And although mine assertion, be somewhat differing from the old 
inveterat opinion, which I confesse hath mania graie heares, whereby 
mine adversaries have gained more authoritie than reason, towards 
the maintenance of their presumptions and old wives fables : yet 
shall it fullie agree with Gods glorie, and with his holie word. And 
albeit there be hold taken by mine adver/saries of certeine few words B. iii. 
or sentences in the scripture that maketh a shew for them : yet when 
the whole course thereof maketh against them, and impugneth the 
same, yea and also their owne places rightlie understood doo nothing 
at all releeve them : I trust their glorious title and argument of 
antiquitie will appeare as stale and corrupt as the apothecaries drugs, 
or grocers spice, which the longer they be preserved, the woorsse they 
are. And till you have perused my booke, ponder this in your mind, 
to wit, that Saga, Thessala, Strides, Lamia (which words and none 
other being in use do properlie signifie our witches) are not once 
found written in the old or new testament ; and that Christ himselfe 
in his gospell never mentioned the name of a witch, And that neither 
he, nor Moses ever spake anie one word of the witches bargaine with 
the divell, their bagging, their riding in the aire, their transferring of 
corne or grasse from one feeld to another, their hurting of children 
or cattell with words or charmes, their bewitching of but