othing else but the bare 
effect of the Natures and Tempers of such Aerial beings to fight and 
randevouse immediately after sun-set, or else later in the Summer 
evenings, which is their principal time of such Conventions. And 
though it must be confest that such Spirits may be, and are the 
Devils Instruments as appertaining to the Kingdom whereof he is 
Ruler ; Yet considered in themselves, their Nature is wholly harmless, 
as to ought that may be called innate Evill, having nothing in them

--- PAGE 608 ---
Book II. 
A Discourse concerning 
that is eternal as the Soul of Man : and consequently nothing in them 
that is able to make them capable of enjoying Heaven, or induring \
the torments of Hell. 
Spinis appro- 6. And it is believed by some, that according to the motion of the 
Spheres! ^ Spheres, there are certain companies of Aerial Spirits good and bad j
that follow them in their motions round the earth, the good distilling |
influences that are good, and the bad, such influences as are destruc- |
tive to every thing that is under their Dominion. It is also believed |
that by the assistance of Devils, and damned Spirits, such Aerial 
[» /-frtrf, and] Spirits are given for Familiars to some Magicians add* Witches with i
whom they are said to have actual copulation, and the enjoyment of I
every dainty meat through their assistance, being able thereby to go j
invisible, to fly through the air, and steal Treasures and Jewels from 
the Coffers of Princes, as also carouse in Wine-sellers, and Pantries j
of those that are most amply provided with the choisest Daynties. |
Terresiial Spi- 7- Subordinate unto these of the Air are the Terrestrial Spirits, 
which are of several degrees according to the places which they 
51. occupy, as Woods, Moun/tains, Caves, Fens, Mines, Ruins, Desolate 
places, and Antient Buildings, calld by the Antient Heathens after 
['■ read, Lamite] various names, as Nymphs, Satyrs, Lajnii/-^ Dryades, Sylvanes, Cobali, \
Ss^c. And more particularly the Faeries, who do principally inhabit 
the Mountains, and Caverns of the Earth, whose nature is to make '
strange Apparitions on the Earth in Meddows, oron Mountains being 
like Men, and Women, Souldiers, Kings, and Ladyes Children, and 
Horse-men cloathed in green, to which purpose they do in the night 
steal hempen stalks from the fields where they grow, to Convert them 
into Horses as the Story goes. Besides, it is credibly affirmed and 
beleev'd by many, That such as are real Changlings, or Lunaticks, 
have been brought by such Spirits and Hobgoblins, the true Child ^
being taken away by them in the place whereof such are left, being 
commonly half out of their wits, and given to many Antick practices, 
and extravagant fancies, which passions do indeed proceed from the 
powerful influence of the Planet in their nativity, and not from such 
foolish conjectures. 
Faeries. 8. Such jocund and facetious Spirits are sayd to sport themselvs in 
the night by tumbling and fooling with Servants and Shepherds in 
Country houses, pinching them black and blew, and leaving Bread, 
Butter, and Cheese sometimes with them, which if they refuse to eat, 
some mischief shall undoubtedly befall them by the means of these 
Faeries. And many such have been taken away by the sayd Spirits, 
for a fortnight, or a month together, being carryed with them in 
Chariots through the Air, over Hills, and Dales, Rocks and Precipices, 
till at last they have been found lying in some Meddow or Mountain

--- PAGE 609 ---
Devils and Spirits. 
Chap. IV 
bereaved of their sences, and commonly of one of their Members to 
boot. 
9. Certainly the Lai-es and Penates^ or houshold Gods of the antient Lares, and Do- 
Heathens were no other than such like Spirits who for several years rits!'"^'' 
would keep their residence in one house till upon some displeasure 
offered, or offences done by any of the sayd Family, they departed 
and were never afterwards heard of. There are plenty of such 
examples to be found in Olaus Magnus, and Hector Boetlms* in his {'-'read, Boe- 
History of Scotland, relating wonderful passages of Robin-goodfelloivs, 
and such as have been familiar amongst mankind. 
10. JLuriDail a familiar of this kinde did for many years inhabit the LuHdana-H- 
Island Poitionia, the largest of the Orcades in Scotlajid, suplying the ^P"""- 
place of Man-servant and Maid-servant with wonderful diligence to 
these Families whom he did haunt, sweeping their rooms, and washing 
their dishes and making their fires before any were up in the morning. 
This HurtlJail affirmed. That he was genhis Astral, of that Island 
that his place or residence in the dayes oi Solomon and David was at 
Jerusalem ; That then he was called by the Jewes ISflelalft, and after 
that he remaind Long in the Dominion of Wales, instructing their 
Bards in Brittish Poesy and Prophesies being called JHrtfjin, ?Mallft, 
(irlgin : And now said he, I have removed hither, and alas my con- 
tinuance is but short, for in 70 years I must resigne my place to 
JSalftin Lord of the Northei-n mountains. 
1 1. Many wonderful and incredible things did he also relate of this Balhin a Fami- 
loalfeill, whom he called the Lord of the Northern Mountains, affirming 
that he was shaped like a Satyr and fed upon the Air, having Wife 
and Children to the number of 12 thousand which were the brood of 
the Northern Faeries inhabiting Southerland and Catenes with the 
adjacent Islands ; And that these were the Companies of Spirits that 
hold continual wars with the Fiery Spirits in the Mountain Heckla 
that vomits fire in Ishmdia. That their speech was antient Irish, 
and their dwelling the Caverns of the Rocks, and Mountains, which 
relation is recorded in the Antiquities of Pomojiia. 
12. I have read another wonderful relation in a book de Annulis A strange ex- 
Antiquorttm, Concerning a young man from whom the power of ^"P'^' 
Venus was taken away so that he could not Company with his new 
marryed Wife. The Story is briefly thus ; " Being busy at play or 
" e.xercise with some of his Companions on his marriage day, he put 
"his wedding Ring on the finger of the Statue of Venus that stood 
" besides the place least it should be lost ; when he had done, returning 
"to take his Ring, the finger was bended inward, so that he could by 
" no means pluck off/ the King to his great amazement, at which 52. 
" instant he forsooke the place, and in the night the Image of Venus 
liar.

--- PAGE 610 ---
Rook 11. A Discouvse concerning 
" appeared unto him, saying, Thou hast espoused me, and shalt not 
" meddle with any other : in the morning returning, the Ring was gone, 
" and the finger made straight again, which troubled him mightily, so 
" that he consulted with a Magician, who wrote a Letter to some 
" Principal Spirit in that Dominion to which Vemes belong'd, bidding 
" the party stand watching at such a place at such an houre till he saw 
" many troops of Spirits pass by him, and describmg one in a Chariot, 
" of stern and terrible Countenance, to whom he bad him deliver the 
" Letter ; All which he performed, and after the person in the Chariot 
"had read the contents thereof, he broke out into this expression, 
"great God, how long shall we be subject to the insolencies of this 
"accursed Rascal, naming the Magitian : But withal calling to a most 
" beauteous Woman from amongst the Company, he charged her to 
"deliver back the Ring which at length she did with much aversness, 
" and after that he injoyd his Marriage rites without impediment. 
Spirits of 13. Besides the innumerable Troops of Terrestrial Spirits called 
Mountains? Fueryes there are also Nymphs of the Woods, Mountains, Groves, and 
[» read, ^ 
Fountains, as <PagIe* aret^usa, lo, JHenippa, Irene, &c. who are sayd 
to be altogether of the fjeminine kinde, sporting and dancing, and 
feasting amongst the trees in Woods, and bathing in clean and limpid 
Fountains ; such have been seen by many, and are often alluded to, 
by the Ronia7t and Greek Poets. There is also a relation of a German 
Prince, " who being exceeding thirsty and weary with hunting and 
" hawking, lost his Company in the Woods, on a suddain beheld an 
" opening at a little hillock amongst the trees, and a most beautiful 
" Maiden offering a Golden Horn full of Liquor, which he received and 
" drunk, and after rid quite away with the sayd Horn, not regarding the 
" Virgins tears, who lamented after him ; tis sayd that having spilt 
*' some of the sayd Liquor, it fetcht the hair from off his Horses skin, 
" and the horn is yet to be seen in Germany, which I have been told by 
" one that hath seen and handled it, affirming. That the Gold for purity 
" cannot be parallel' d. 
Innibi, and 14- Another sort are the Ineutt, and Succuit, of whom it is reported, 
Succubi. the Hunns have the original, being begotten betwixt these Inrubt, 
and certain Magical women whom Philinier the King of the Goths 
banished into the deserts, whence arose that savage and untamed 
Nation, whose speech seemed rather the mute attempts of brute 
Beasts, than any articulate sound and well distinguished words. To 
these Incubi are attributed the diseases of the blood called the Night- 
hag, which certainly have a natural cause, although at the instant of 
time when the party is oppressed, it is probable that certain malevolent 
Spirits may mix themselvs therein and terrifie the soul and minde of 
the afflicted party.

--- PAGE 611 ---
Devils and Spirits. 
Chap. IV. 
15. And amongst such Spirits as are resident amongst mortals, 
there is a very frovvard kinde, who take delight to pull down what 
man hath builded, who have been seen at the building of strong and 
mighty Castles to come in the night and tumble all to the ground 
that the workmen had reared the day before ; of this sort were i^oron, 
S'tillton, (Slaura, and IStbtoIIa, four pestiferous, and turbulent Animals 
that for many years infested the first founders of the Emperours 
Seraglio : Till one of the holy Musselmans did by certain Charms, 
and Exorcisms constrain and bind them, to tell their names, and the 
cause of their disturbing, which they declared, and were by him con- 
fined to destroy the mines of Copper in Himgaria. 
16. There is also a Relation extant in the life of Paul the Hermit 
of a Satyr appearing to him in the Woods, and discoursing with him 
that it was a mortal Creature as he, and served the same God, 
dehorting the people to worship them for demi-Gods, as they had 
been accustomed to ; Like unto this is the Story of the Death of the 
great God Pan ; That a Mariner sailing by the Island of Cicilia, 
was called by his name from the shore, and by a certain voice was 
bid to tell the Inhabitants of the next Island, that the great God Pan 
was dead, which he o/beyed, and though in the next Island there were 
no Inhabitants, yet when he approached he proclaimed, towards the 
shoar that Pan was deceased, immediately after which Proclamation 
he could sensibly hear most doleful and lachrymable Cryes, and 
noyses, as of those that lamented his departure. 
17. lanttc, is sayd by Magitians, to be a water Spirit, who is ever 
present when any are drownd in the water, being delighted much in 
the destruction of mankinde, that it may enjoy the Company of their 
Astral Spirits after their decease ; for according to the four Com- 
plexions or Constitutions of the body of Man, The Astral Spirit 
associates it self with separated substances ; The Phlegmatick, 
to the watry Spirits : The Sanguine, to those of the Aire ; The 
Cholerick, to the Fire ; and the Melancholy, to the Terrestrial 
Spirits. But this is only to be supposed of such persons as dyed 
in discontent, and restlesness. 
18. Of another sort are such Aquaiick Animals as in fbrmer times 
have conversed, and procreated with mankinde bearing divers Children ; 
And at length snatching all away into the watry Elerpent again, 
whereof there are variety of Examples in Cardanus and Bodin. Of 
this sort was the Familiar of Paulus a Mendicant Frier, called by him 
jFlortntella, and entertaind as his Bed-fellow for forty years, though 
unknown and unseen to any but himself, till upon some unhandsome 
carriage of the Fryer, his Companion accompanymg him over the 
Danube, leapt into the River and was never after seen. 
 u 
A froward 
kinde of Spirit, 
Example. 
Example. 
53. 
Janthe a Spir 
of the water. 
Watry Spirits 
that procreate.

--- PAGE 612 ---
514 
Book II. 
A Discourse concerning 
Apparitions on 
the water. 
Prophetical ri- 
vers, and vo- 
cal fountains. 
Ex:implc. 
Spirits in 
Green~La?id 
Destroying 
Spirits. 
64. 
19. Innumerable are the reports and accidents incident unto such 
as frequent the seas, as fisher-men and sailers who discourse of noises, 
flashes, shadows, ecchoes, and other visible appearances nightly seen, 
and heard, upon the surface of the water. And as the disposition of the 
Heavens is according to the constellations, and climates, so are these 
spectres appropriate to particular parts, and coasts, from the North to 
the Southern Pole. But more especially, abounding in the North, 
about Norweigh Isleland, Green Latid, and Nova Zembla. 
20. Neither are the Storyes of the Greek, and Latine Poets all 
together to be sleighted in this particular ; for many verities are inter- 
-woven with their fictions, they speak of vocal Forrests, as Dodona, of 
Talkative Rivers, as Scainander, of sensitive Fountains as Arethtcsa, 
Menippa, and ALagle ; Which more credible Historians have partly 
confirmed in the Relation of Dodona, asserting that the trees do seem 
to speak by reason of the various Apparitions, and Phantasms, that 
attend the Forrest. And also in the Story of the River Scamander, 
which is sayd at this day to afford plenty of spectres, and prophetical 
Spirits, that have nightly conversation with the Turkish Sailers 
coming by that way with Gallyes into the Mediterranean. 
21. The like is reported of a Castle in Norweigh standing over a 
Lake wherein a Satyr appeareth sounding a Trumpet before the death 
of any Souldier, or Governour belonging to the same, tis sayd to be 
the Ghost of some murdered Captain that hath become so Fatal, and 
Ominous to his Successors. But with more probability may be 
called a Spectre proper to the place according to the Constellation. 
22. And it hath been the conjecture of eminent speculators that 
from the Loins of such arise the numerous brood of Elves, Faeryes, 
Lycanthropi ; And Pigniyes, sometimes visible, sometimes invisible in 
Greefi-Land and the adjacent rocks where they have no concomitants, 
but bears and scurvy-grass to mix, and make merry withal, except 
they pass from thence to the Northern parts of America, where they 
shall find their off-spring adored for Gods, and Goddesses, by the 
ignorant Inhabitants about new Albion, and as far South as Mexico, 
as is amply related in the discourses of Drake, Cortes and Purchas 
concerning the conquest and discovery of these Territoryes. 
23. By Apparitions upon the water many have been tempted to leap 
into the Sea in pursuit thereof till they were drowned, of which 
spectres there is a sort called by Pselliis, Ordales, who do appear like 
Ducks or other Water fouls, till they by fluttering upon the water, do 
entice their followers to pursue them so farr that many perish in the 
attempt, which doth greatly delight these faithless/ Spirits who (as we 
have said before) do long to accompany their Astral Spirits after their 
decease. An Example of this kinde I my self knew, besides the

--- PAGE 613 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. iv. 
515 
numerous relations I have had from the mouths of others, which con- 
firm the opinions of the antient Magicians concerning these water 
Spirits, that of all the rest they are the most deceitful, and dangerous, 
like the flattering Seas, and swift gliding Torrents, that when they 
have wonn any thing, to admire, and sound them, do carry them 
violently into the abysse of their own Element. 
24. But we will leave the waters and insist a little on the nature of 
Igneous or Fiery Spirits that inhabit the Mountains in Hecla, ALtna., Fiery Spirits. 
Propo Chatnp, and Poconzi ; Where the Courts, and Castles of these 
puissant Champions are kept. The opinion of some is, That they are What these 
not Ast7'al, but Infernal Spirits, and Damned Souls, that for a term ^i""'''^"'- 
of years are confined to these bterning Mountaitts for their Inigicities : 
Which opinion although it be granted, yet we may assert. That for 
the most part the apparitions, sounds, noices, clangors, and clamors, 
that are heard about the Mountain Hccla in Island and other places, 
are the effects of separated Starry beings, who are neither capable of 
good nor evill, but are of a middle vegetative nature, and at the 
dissolution of the Media Natura shall be again reduced into their 
primary yEther. 
25. And from natural Causes, it may be easily demonstrated. That why they de- 
there is great Correspondence betwixt such substances, and the Ele- ''y 
efemem. 
ment of fire, by reason of the Internal Flagrat and Central Life 
proceeding from the Quintessence or* one only Element which upholds [* > of] 
them, in Motion, Life, and Nourishment. As every natural, and 
supernatural being is upheld, and maintain'd out of the self-same 
root from whence it had its original, or rise ; So the Angels feed upon 
the Celestial Manna, The Devils of the fruits of Hell, which is 
natural to their appetite, as trash for swine ; the Astral beings ; of the 
source of the stars, the Beasts, Birds, or Reptiles of the fruits of 
the Eatth,t and the gas of the Air, the fishes of the blass of the [t s/c] 
Water ; But more particularly, every thing is nourished by its 
Mother, as Infants at the Breast, either by exhausting or fomen- 
tation. 
26. Such Spirits are very officious in the burnings of Towns, or Spirits that 
Cole-pits, delighting much to dance and exult amidst the flames, and '^"^ 
become Incendiaries worse then the material Cause of the Combus- 
tion, often tempting men in drukeness,J to burn their own Houses, [t sic} 
and causing Servants carelesly to sleep, that such unlucky accidents 
may happen. As the Story of Ksarwilwui a Town in Poland doth 
confirm, which was reduced to ashes by three of these pestilentious 
Animals, called gaggoa, ISrouilial, and UalUtoin, who after many open 
Threatnings for six months together, that they would destroy the City, 
and Citizens, did on a dark and stormy night, set all on fire on a

--- PAGE 614 ---
Book II. A Discoursc coucevning 
pastime. 
suddain in twenty or thirty several places, which irrecoverably de- 
stroyed the Inhabitants. 
Their food and 2"] . As for the nourishment of fiery Spirits, it is radical heat, and 
the influence of the Aery Region ; their sport and pastime consisteth 
for the most part in tumbling, and fooling one with another when the 
flames are most impetuous, and violent in the Mountains / And it is 
likewise credited by some that their office is to cruciate and punish 
some Evil Livers, retaining, and tormenting their Souls, or Astral 
Spirits for many years after the Bodies decease, which is too empty a 
notion to be hearkened unto by any that are well informed of their 
natures. 
Why theyde- 28. Neither is it to be wondered at that they are so much delighted 
fifr*!' quality. ^''^ the fiery quality in regard of their affinity and appropriation with 
infernal spirits, whose state and being is altogether damnable and 
deplorable ; for although they have not the ability of attaining either 
the Heavenly or Infernal quality, by reason that they are utterly voyd 
* of the innermost Center, and may be rather called bruits, then rational 
* Fire] Animals, yet because they belong to the outermost *-principle, such is 
their innate Affinity, and Unity with the dark World, or infernal King- 
dome that they do often become the Devils Agents to propagate his 
works upon the face of the Earth./ 
Astral Spirits 55. 29. By the Instigations of infernal Spirits they are often sent to 
the"dev[u."' terrifie men with nocturnal visions, in the likeness of monstrous Beasts 
or Ghosts of their deceased Friends. They are moreover often abetted 
to tempt and provoke melancholy people to execute themselves ; 
besides innumerable wayes they have of executing the pleasures of 
[» szV] '"iniquous Spirits through malicious Instigations, and secret Stratagems 
projected by them to the destruction of mortal men, especially when 
the work to be effected by the Devil is too too hard for his subtle and 
spiritual nature to bring to pass, because the same belongs to the 
Astral source or outward principle to which these dubious Spirits do 
properly belong ; then are they frequently sollicited to mediate in such 
treacherous actions, as the hellish Spirits have conspired against the 
Lives of mortal men. 
Why "i^s^^^^^"' 30. More particularly, These Spirits that belong to the fiery Element, 
re^quires eir most officious in this kinde of service, being naturally such as the 
Antecedent matter hath sufficiently demonstrated ; but according to 
the ranks and Categoryes to which they belong, some of them are 
more inveterate, and malicious in their undertakings then the rest. 
But every kinde of Astral Spirit is obsequious to the Kingdome of 
darkness, that the devilish Spirits can effect little or nothing without 
their assistance in this external principle of the Starrs and Elements 
upon the bodies or possessions of Mankind ; because their bodies are

--- PAGE 615 ---
Divels and Spirits. chap. iv. 5 1 7 
too crude and rough for the conveyance of their influence, either in 
Dreams, Raptures, Phihres, Charms, or Constellations, as the follow- 
ing Chapter of the nature of Infernal beings shall make plain, wherein 
the nature and capacity of every damned Spirit is decyphered 
according to the truth of the antient Philosophy. 
31. Leave we now the Spirits of the fire, to illustrate the natures of 
subterranean Beings, whose Orders, Species, and Degrees, are various; 
for they consist in these distinctions, viz. Spirits of men deceased, 
Souls of men deceased, separated Spirits Astral, separate Spirits 
semi-Infernal, Spirits appropriate to the Constellations where any of 
the seven metals, viz. Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Luna, Venus, 
Mercury, are found in the bowels of the Earth ; and as farr as the 
natures of Minerals are distinct one from the other, so much distant 
are these Subterranean Spirits in Nature and Faculty in respect of 
their places, shapes, names, and qualities. 
32. But they are not all confined unto the metallick Kingdome ; for 
there are also Spirits of the Mountains, VaUies, Caves, Deeps, Hiata's, 
or Chasma's of the Earth, hidden Treasures, Tombs, Vaults, and 
Sepultures of the Dead. To the last belong the Astral Spirits of 
deceased Mortals, that delight to hover over the antient Carcases to 
which they belong'd, seeking still to be dissolved, and diligently 
enquiring the Cause of their retention ; such are resident in silent 
Caves, and solitary Vaults, where the deceased lie till the Humidum 
Radicale be exciccate, and totally dryd up, after which their tricks 
are no more manifest, but are utterly extinguished, and annihilated. 
33. To the next, belong such Spirits as are Protectors of hidden 
Treasures, from a natural Cause, from whence they do exceedingly 
envy mans benefit, and accomodation in the discovery thereof, ever 
haunting such places where money is conceal'd, and retaining malevo- 
lent and poysonous Influences, to blast the Lives and Limbs of those 
that dare to attempt the discovery thereof : Peters of Devonshire with 
his confederates, who by Conjuration attempted to dig for such 
defended Treasures, was crumbled into Atomes, as it were, being 
reduced to Ashes with his Companions in the twinkling of an eye. 
34. And upon this particular, we have plenty of Examples of the 
destruction of such as by Magical experiments have discovered hidden 
Treasures ; which instances do rather seem to prove. That such as 
haunt these places do more nearly belong to the Infernal, then to the 
Astral Hierarchy, in regard that they are so infesting and inveterate 
to Mortal men, that the Grand Intention of the Prince of darkness 
may be accomplished in their designs./ 
35. But of all the rest such as haunt Mines and mettle men, are the 
most pernicious, and frequent from the same Cause with the former. 
Subterranean 
Spirits. 
Spirits of the 
^Iountains, 
Caves, and 
Tombs. 
Spirits of hid- 
den Treasures. 
The nature of 
such Spirits. 
56.Spirits that in- 
fest Mines and 
Miners.

