is, 
D is mas GesiaS, 
in medio est divina potestas, 
Dismas damnatur, 
Gestas ad astra levatur : 
Three bodies on a bough doo hang, 
for merits of inequalitie, 
Dismas and Gestas, in the midst 
the power of the divinitie. 
Dismas is damned, but Gestas lif- 
ted up above the starres on hie. 
Also this : Eructavit cor meum verbum bomim veritaiem nunquam 
dicam regi. 4!r Otherwise : As the milke of our ladie was lussious to 
our Lord Jesus Christ ; so let this torture or rope be pleasant to mine

--- PAGE 309 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 17. 
21 1 
armes and members. Otherwise: Jesus auteni transicns per meditim Luk. 4. 
illoruin ibat. -i'r Otherwise : You shall not break a bone of him./ 
^ Counter charmes against these and all other witchcrafts, in the 260. 
saieng also whereof witches are vexed, Sr'c. 
'Ructavit cor metan verbzcm bontiin, dicam cuncta oiera mea P^ai. 44. 
■ . 7 , . n Scripture 
■si- Otherwise : Doi>nne labia mea aperies, cr' os memn properiie 
E 
annunciabit veritatem. -3;^ Otherwise : Contere brachia iniqui rei, £^ applied. 
lingua maligna subvertetur. 
regi. 
T 
^ A charme for the choine cough. 
Ake three sips of a chalice, when the preest hath said masse, 
and swallow it downe with good devotion, &c./ 
^[ For corporall or spirituall rest. 
In nomine patris, up and downe, 
Et filii spiritus sancti upon my crowne. 
Crux Christi upon my brest, 
Sweete ladie send me eternall rest !* 
188. 
[• Ital. & Rom.] 
\ Charmes to find out a theefe. 
THe meanes how to find out a theefe, is thus : Turne your face to 
the east, and make a crosse upon christall with oile olive, and 
under the crosse write these two words [Saint Helen].* Then a child 
that is innocent, and a chast virgine borne in true wedlocke, and not 
base begotten, of the age of ten yeares, must take the christall in his 
hand, and behind his backe, kneeling on thy knees, thou must 
devoutlie and reverentlie sale over this praier thrise : I beseech thee 
my ladie S. Helen, mother of king Constantine, which diddest find 
the crosse whereupon Christ died : by that thy holie devotion, and 
invention of the crosse, and by the same crosse, and by the joy 
which thou conceivedst at the finding thereof and by the love which 
thou barest to thy sonne Constantine, and by the great goodnes 
which thou dooest alwaies use, tliat thou shew me in this christall, 
whatsoever I aske or desire to knowe ; Amen. And when the child 
seeth the angell in the christall, demand what you will, and the angell 
will make answer thereunto. Memorandum,* that this be doone just 
at the sunne/ rising, when the wether is faire and cleere. 
Cardanus derideth these and such like fables, and setteth downe 
his judgement therein accordinglie, in the sixteenth booke De rerum 
O most 
woonder- 
fuU vertue 
hidden in 
the letters 
of S. He- 
lens holie 
name ! 
[« So in text.] 
[» Rom.] 
261. 
Card. lib. i6. 
de var. rer. 
cap. 93-

--- PAGE 310 ---
2 I 2 
1 2. Booke. 
T/ie discove^ne 
cn.sse be 
forgotten 
all is not 
V oorth a 
pudding. 
var. These conjurors and couseners forsooth will shew you in a 
glasse the theefe that hath stolne anie thing from you, and this is 
their order. They take a glasse viall full of holie water, and set it 
upon a linnen cloth, which hath beene purified, not onelie by washing, 
but by sacrifice, &c. On the mouth of the viall or urinall, two olive 
leaves must be laid acrosse, with a litle conjuration said over it, by a 
child ; to wit thus : Angela bone, angele candide^per tuatii sanctitatem, 
medinq; virginitatem, ostende 7nihi furem : with three Pater tiosters, 
three Aves, and betwixt either of them a *crosse made with the naile 
of the thumbe upon the mouth of the viall ; and then shall be seene 
angels ascending and descending as it were motes in the sunne 
beames. The theefe all this while shall suffer great torments, and 
his face shall be seene plainlie, even as plainlie I beleeve as the man 
in the moone. For in truth, there are toies artificiallie conveied into 
the glasse, which will make the water bubble, and devises to make 
images appeare in the bubbles : as also there be artificiall glasses, 
which will shew unto you that shall looke thereinto, manie images 
of diverse formes, and some so small and curious, as they shall in 
favour resemble whom so ever you thinke upon. Looke in John 
Bap. Neap, for the confection of such glasses. The subtilties hereof 
are so detected, and the mysteries of the glasses so common now, 
189. and their / cousenage so well knowne, &c : that I need not stand 
upon the particular confutation hereof. Cardanus in the place 
before cited reporteth, how he tried with children these and diverse 
circumstances the whole illusion, and found it to be plaine knaverie 
and cousenage. 
^ Another mate to find out a theefe that hath stolne anie thing 
from yoti. 
' O to the sea side, and gather as manie pebles as you suspect 
v_J persons for that matter ; carrie them home, and throwe them into 
the fier, and burie them under the threshhold, where the parties are like 
to come over. There let them lie three dales, and then before sunne 
262. rising take them awaie. Then set a porrenger/ full of water in a 
circle, wherein must be made crosses everie waie, as manie as can 
stand in it ; upon the which must be written : Christ overcommeth, 
Christ reigneth, Christ commandeth. The porrenger also must be 
signed with a crosse, and a forme of conjuration must be pronounced. 
Then each stone must be throwne into the water, in the name of the 
suspected. And when you put in the stone of him that is guiltie, 
the stone will make the water boile, as though glowing iron were put

--- PAGE 311 ---
of Witchcraft. cimp. 17. 213 
thereinto. Which is a meere knacke of legier de maine, and to be 
accomplished diverse waies. 
^ To put o:it the theeves eie. 
REad the seven * psahnes with the Letanie, and then must be [• penitential] 
said a horrible praier to Christ, and God the father, with a cursse 
against the theefe. Then in the middest of the step of your foote, on 
the ground where you stand, make a circle like an eie, and write 
thereabout certeine barbarous names, and drive with a coopers ham- 
mar, or addes into the middest thereof a brasen naile consecrated, 
saieng : Justus es Domine, &^ justa judicia tua. Then the theefe shall 
be bewraied by his crieng out. 
^ Another waie to Jitid out a theefe. 
STicke a paire of sheeres in the rind of a sive, and let two These be 
persons set the top of each of their forefingers upon the upper tTmoclT 
part of the sheeres, holding it with the sive up from the ground j^^^g'?,"^ 
steddilie, and. aske Peter and Paule whether A. B. or C. hath stolne tiiem no 
the thing lost, and at the nomination of the guiltie person, the sive dabi" de- 
will turne round. This is a great practise in all countries, and in- 
deed a verie bable. For with the beating of the pulse some cause of 
that motion ariseth, some other cause by slight of the fingers, some 
other by the wind gathered in the sive to be staid, &c : at the 
pleasure of the holders. Some cause may be the imagination, which 
upon conceipt at the naming of the partie altereth the common course 
of the pulse. As may well be conceived by a ring held steddilie by a 
thred betwixt the finger and the thombe, over or rather in a goblet or 
glasse ; which within short space will strike against the side therof so 
manie strokes as the holder thinketh it/ a clocke, and then will staie : 26j. 
the which who so prooveth shall find true. 
^ A charme to find out or spoile a theefe. 
OF this matter, concerning the apprehension of theeves by words, 
I will cite one charme, called S. Adelberts cursse, being both 
for/ length of words sufficient to wearie the reader, and for substan- 190. 
tiall stuffe comprehending all that apperteineth unto blasphemous 
speech or curssing, allowed in the church of Rome, as an excommuni- 
cation and inchantment.

--- PAGE 312 ---
12. Booke. 
The discoverie 
% Saint Adelberts ctirsse or charine against theeves. 
BY the authoritie of the omnipotent Father, the Sonne, and the 
Holie-ghost,and by the holie virgine Marie mother of our Lord 
Jesu Christ, and the holie angels and archangels, and S. Michaell, 
and S. JoJm Baptist, and in the behalfe of S. Peter the apostle, and 
the residue of the apostles, and of S. Steeven, and of all the 
martyrs, of S. Sylvester, and of S. Adelbert, and all the con- 
fessors, and S. Alegand, and all the holie virgins, and of all the 
saints in heaven and earth, unto whom there is given power to 
bind and loose : we doo excommunicate, damne, cursse, and bind 
with the knots and bands of excommunication, and we doo segregate 
from the bounds and lists of our holie mother the church, all those 
theeves, sacrilegious persons, ravenous catchers, dooers, counsellers, 
coadjutors, male or female, that have committed this theft or mis- 
cheefe, or have usurped any part therof to their owne use. Let their 
share be with Dathan and Abiran, whome the earth swallowed up 
for their sinnes and pride, and let them have part with Judas that 
betraied Christ, Amen : and with Pontius Pilat, and with them that 
said to the Lord, Depart from us, we will not understand thy waies ; 
let their children be made orphanes. Curssed be they in the field, in 
the grove, in the woods, in their houses, barnes, chambers, and beds ; 
and curssed be they in the court, in the waie, in the towne, in the 
castell, in the water, in the church, in the churchyard, in the tribunall 
place, in battell, in their abode, in the market place, in their talke, in 
silence, in eating, in watching, in sleeping, in drinking/ in feeling, in 
sitting, in kneeling, in standing [,] in lieng, in idkiies, in all their 
worke, in their bodie and soule, in their five wits, and in everie place. 
Curssed be the fruit of their wombs, and curssed be the fruit of their 
lands, and curssed be all that they have. Curssed be their heads, 
their mouthes, their nostrels, their noses, their lips, their jawes, their 
teeth, their eies and eielids, their braines, the roofe of their mouthes, 
their toongs, their throtes, their breasts, their harts, their bellies, their 
livers, all their bowels, and their stomach. 
Curssed be their navels, their spleenes, their bladder. Curssed 
be their thighs, their legs, their feete, their toes, their necks, their 
shoulders. Curssed be their backs, curssed be their armes, curssed be 
their elbowes, curssed be their hands, and their fingers, curssed be 
both the nails of their hands and feete ; curssed be their ribbes and 
their genitals, and their knees, curssed be their flesh, curssed be their 
bones, curssed be their bloud, curssed be the skin of their bodies, 
curssed be the marrowe in their bones, curssed be they from the 
crowne of the head, to the sole of the foote : and whatsoever is be-

--- PAGE 313 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 17. 215 
twixt the same, be it accurssed, that is to saie, their five senses ; to 
wit, their seeing, their hearing, their smelling, their tasting, and their 
feeling. Curssed be they in the holie crosse, in the passion of Christ, 
with his five wounds, with the effusi/on of his bloud, and by the milke 
of the virgine Marie. I conjure thee Lucifer, with all thy soldiers, by 
the *father, the son, and the Holie-ghost, with the humanitie and 
nativitie of Christ, with the vertue of all saints, that thou rest not day 
nor night, till thou bringest them to destruction, either by drowning 
or hanging, or that they be devoured by wild beasts, or burnt, or 
slaine by their enimies, or hated of all men living. And as our Lord 
hath given authoritie to Peter the apostle, and his successors, whose 
place we occupie, and to us (though unworthie) that whatsoever we 
bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever we loose on 
earth, shall be loosed in heaven : so we accordinglie, if they will not 
amend, doo shut from them the gates of heaven, and denie unto them 
christian buriall, so as they shall be buried in asses leaze. Further- 
more, curssed be the ground wherein they are buried, let them be 
confounded in the last dale of judgement, let them have no con- 
versation among christians, nor be/houseled* at the houre of death ; 
let them be made as dust before the face of the wind : and as Liicifer 
was expelled out of heaven, and Adam and Eve out of paradise ; so 
let them be expelled from the dale light. Also let them be joined with 
those, to whome the Lord saith at the judgement ; Go ye curssed into 
everlasting fier, which is prepared for the divell and his angels, where 
the worme shall not die, nor the fier be quenched. And as the candle, 
which is throwne out of my hand here, is put out : so let their works 
and their soule be quenched in the stench of hell fier, except they 
restore that which they have stolne, by such a dale : and let everie 
one saie. Amen. After this must be soong *In media vita in inorte 
sumus, Qr'C. 
This terrible curb ^e with bell, booke, and candell added thereunto, 
must needs worke woonders : howbeit among theeves it is not much 
weighed, among wise and true men it is not well liked, to them that 
are robbed it bringeth small releefe : the preests stomach may well 
be eased, but the goods stolne will never the sooner be restored. 
Hereby is bewraied both the malice and follie of popish doctrine, 
whose uncharitable impietie is so impudentlie published, and in such 
order uttered, as everie sentence (if oportunitie served) might be 
prooved both hereticall and diabolicall. But I will answer this cruell 
cursse with another cursse farre more mild and civill, performed by 
as honest a man (I dare saie) as he that made the other, whereof 
mention was latelie made. 
So it was, that a certeine sir Jokfi,* with some of his companie, once 
191. 
a Thus they 
make the 
holie trini- 
tie to beare 
a part in 
their exor- 
cibme, or 
else it is no 
bargaine. 
263. 
[*be-houseled 
text.} 
Matth. 15. 
That is, In 
the midst of 
life we are 
in death, 
&c. 
[*i.e. a priest.]

--- PAGE 314 ---
2. Booke. 
The discoverie 
went abroad a jetting, and in a moone light evening robbed a millers 
weire, and stole all his eeles. The poore miller made his mone to sir 
John himselfe, who willed him to be quiet ; for he would so cursse 
the theefe, and all his confederates, with bell, booke, and candell, 
that they should have small joy of their fish. And therefore the next 
sundaie, sir JoJm got him to the pulpit, with his surplisse on his backe, 
and his stole about his necke, and pronounced these words following 
in the audience of the people. 
All yoti that have stolne the millers eeles* 
Landate Dojiiinum de ccelis, 
And all they that have consented thereto,*! 
Benedicafmis Domino.] 
266. Lo (saith he) there is sauce for your eeles my maisters. 
^ Another inchantment. 
CErteine preests use the hundred and eight psalme as an in- 
chantment or charme, or at the leastwise saieng, that against 
whome soever they pronounce it, they cannot live one whole yeere at 
the uttermost. 
[•■» Rom.] 
A cursse 
for theft. 
192. 
[* = seekers] 
Preserva- 
tives from 
witchcraft 
according 
to M. Mai. 
L.Vairus 
& otners. 
[« Rom.] 
The xviii Chapter. 
^ A charme or experiment to find out a witch. 
In die doini?iico sottclaria pivemim axicngia seu pinguedine 
porci, ttt moris est, pro restaziratione fieri per7engient : 
and when she is once come into the church, the witch 
can never get out, untill the *seachers for hir give hir 
expresse leave to depart. 
But now it is necessarie to shew you how to prevent and cure all 
mischeefes wrought by these charmes & witchcrafts, according to the 
opinion of M. Mai. and others. One principall waie is to naile a 
horsse shoo at the inside of the outmost threshhold of your house, and 
so you shall be sure no witch shall have power to enter thereinto. 
And if you marke it, you shall find that rule observed in manie 
countrie houses. Otherwise : Item the triumphant title to be written 
crossewise, in everie corner of the house, thus : Jesus Nazareniis 
*^rex<i' JudcBoruin Memorandum* you may joine heerewithall, the 
name of the virgine Marie, or of the foure evangelists, or Verbum caro 
factum est. ^ Otherwise : Item in some countries they naile a 
woolves head on the doore. ^s- Otherwise : Item they hang Scilla

--- PAGE 315 ---
of Witchcraft. chap is. 217 
(which is either a loote, or rather in this place garlike) in the roofe 
of the house, for to keepe awaie witches and spirits : and so they doo 
Alicium also. Otherwise : Item perfume made of the gall of a 
blake dog, and his bloud besmeered on the posts and walks of the 
house, driveth out of the doores both devils and witches. Other- 
wise : The house/ where Herba betonica is sowne, is free from all 26"/. 
mischeefes. -jy Otherwise : It is not unknowne that the Romish 
church allowed and used the smoke of sulphur, to drive spirits out of 
their houses ; as they did frankincense and water hallowed. Other- 
wise : Apuleius saith, that Mer curie gave to Ulysses, when he came 
neere to the inchantresse Circe, an hearbe called Verbasctim, which in 
English is called Pullein, or Tapsus barbatus, or Longwoort; and 
that preserved him from the inchantments. Otherwise : Item 
Plinie and Homer both doo saie, that the herbe called Molie is an 
excellent herbe against inchantments ; and saie[,] all that thereby 
Ulysses escaped Circes hir sorceries, and inchantments. Other- 
wise also diverse waies they went to worke in this case, and 
some used this defensative, some that preservative against incan- 
tations. 
And heerein you shall see, not onelie how the religion of papists, and 
infidels agree ; but also how their ceremonies and their opinions are 
all one concerning witches and spirits. 
For thus write th Ovid touching that matter:* [*» //«/,] 
Tkrque senem flamma, ter aqua, ter sulphure lustrat 
She piirifies with Jier thrise 
old horie headed Aesou,l 
With water thrise, and sulphur thrise, 
as she thought meet in reason. 
Againe, the same Ovid commeth in as before : 
Adveniat, qua lustret anus, lectHmque locumque, 
Deferat 6-= tremula sulphur Ss^ ova manu. 
Let some old woman hither come, 
and purge both bed and place. 
And bring in trembling hand new egs 
and sulphur in like case. 
And Virgil also harpeth upon the like string : ** 
 baccare frojitetn 
Cingite, ne vati noceat mala lingua futuro :\ 
Ovid de Me- 
dea. 
Englished by 
Abraham 
Fleming. 
193. 
By Ab. Fle- 
ming. 
Virg- in Bu- 
colicis. 
F F

--- PAGE 316 ---
2l8 
u. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Englished by 268. 
Abraham 
Film ing. 
[• ?of or in.) 
Olaus Goth, 
lib. de gentib. 
Seftentrtona- 
lib. 3. eaf. S. 
• A witches 
conjuration 
to make 
haile cease 
and be dis- 
solved. 
194. 
[• Rom.] 
L. Voir. lib. de 
fascin. 2. cap. 
Of berrie bearings; baccar bowze \boughs\ 
a wreath or garland knit, 
And round about his head and browze 
see decentlie it sit j 
That of an evil I talking tung 
Our future poet be not stung. 
Furthermore, was it not in times of tempests the papists use, *or 
superstition, to ring their belles against divels ; trusting rather to 
the longing of their belles, than to their owne crie unto God with 
fasting and praier, assigned by him in all adversities and dangers : 
according to the order of the Thraciajt preests, which would rore and 
crie, with all the noise they could make, in those tempests. Olaus 
Gothus saith, that his countriemen would shoot in the aire, to assist 
their gods, whome they thought to be then togither by the eares with 
others, and had consecrated arrowes, called Sagitta foviales, even as 
our papists had. Also in steed of belles, they had great hammers, 
called Mallei foviales, to make a noise in time of thunder. In some 
countries they runne out of the doores in time of tempest, blessing 
themselves with a cheese, whereupon there was a crosse made with 
a ropes end upon ascension daie. Also three hailestones to be 
throwne into the fier in a tempest, and thereupon to be said three 
Pater nosters, ihree Avcs, S. fohns gospell, and in fine fugiat 
tenipestas, is a present remedie. Item, to hang an eg laid on ascen- 
sion daie in the roofe of the house, preserveth the same from all 
hurts. *Item, I conjure you haile and wind by the five wounds of 
Christ, by the three nailes which pearsed his hands and his feete, 
and by the foure evangelists, Matthew, Marke, Luke, and fohn, that 
thou come downe dissolved into water. Item, it hath beene a usuall 
matter, to carrie out in tempests the sacraments and relikes, &c. 
Item, against stormes, and manie dumme creatures, the popish 
church useth excommunication as a principall charme. And now to 
be delivered from witches themselves, they hang in their entries an 
hearbe called pentaphyllon, cinquefole, also an olive branch, also 
frankincense, myrrh, valerian, verven, palme, antirchmon, &c : also 
haythorne, otherwise white[t]horne gathered on Maie daie : also the 
smoke of a lappoints fethers driveth spirits/ awaie. There be 
innumerable popish exorcismes, and conjurations for hearbs and 
other things, to be thereby made wholsome both for the bodies and 
soules of men and beasts, and also for/ contagion of weather. 
Memorandum^'-' that at the gathering of these magicall herbs, the 
Credo is necessarie to be said, as Vairus afifirmeth ; and also the 
Pater noster, for that is not superstitious. Also Sprenger saith, that

--- PAGE 317 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. I 
to throw up a blacke chicken in the aire, will make all tempests to Mai.MaUt. 
• 11 'iiiic -iTc 1 1 par. 2. qua', i. 
cease : so it be done with the hand of a witch. If a soule wander cap. 15. 
in the likenesse of a man or woman by night, molesting men, with Note that 
bewailing their torments in purgatorie, by reason of tithes forgotten, Jj°"(,7o?a- 
&c : and neither masses nor conjurations can helpe ; the exorcist in nie spirit 
his ceremoniall apparell must go to the toome of that bodie, and by daie, ^ 
spurne thereat, with his foote, saieng; Vade ad gehennam, G&\. quoth Nota. 
packing to hell : and by and by the soule goeth thither, and there 
remaineth for ever, ^l^ Otherwise : There be masses of purpose for 
this matter, to unbewitch the bewitched. -Jit- Otherwise : You must 
spet into the pissepot, where you have made water, ^j^ Otherwise : 
Spet into the shoo of your right foote, before you put it on : and that 
Vairus saith is good and holsome to doo, before you go into anie 
dangerous place. •J|^ Otherwise : That neither hunters nor their 
dogs male be bewitched, they cleave an oken branch, and both they 
and their dogs passe over it. ^'c Otherwise : S. Augustine saith, Aug. deci- 
that to pacifie the god Liber, whereby women might have fruite of 7' ta/,."'2. ' - 
the seeds they sowe, and that their gardens and feelds should not be 
bewitched ; some cheefe grave matrone used to put a crowne upon 
his genital] member, and that must be publikelie done. 
To spoile a theefe, a witch., or anie other enimie, attd to be deliv- 
ered from the evill. 
UPon the Sabboth daie before sunrising, cut a hazell wand^ 
saieng : I cut thee O bough of this summers growth, in the 
name of him whome I meane to beate or maime. Then cover the 
table, and saie ^ In nomine patris ►f" &^ Jilii ^ £r= spiritics sancti ^ 
ter. And striking thereon saie as followeth (english it he that can) 
Drochs niyroch, esenaroth, >^ betu ►{< baroch ass ►{< maaroth ^ : 
and then saie ; Holie trinitie punish him that hath/ wrought this syo. 
mischiefe, & take it away by thy great justice, Eson elioji emaris, 
ales, age ; and strike the carpet with your wand. 
^ A notable charme or medicine to pull out an arrowhead, or 
anie such thing that sticketh iji the flesh or bones, and can- 
not otherwise be had out. 
Q Aie three severall times kneeling ; Oremus, prceceptis salutaribus 
^ moniti. Pater noster, ave Maria. Then make a crosse saieng : 
The Hebrew knight strake our Lord Jesu Christ, and I beseech thee. The He-

