ire. Some saie that divels 
are not, but when they are sent ; and therefore are 
called evill angels. Some thinke that the 
divell sendeth his angels abrode, and 
he himselfe maketh his con- 
tinuall abode in hell, 
his mansion 
place. 
Plotinus. 
The Greka. 
Laur. Ana- 
nias. 
The Mani- 
cheis. 
Plutarch, 
Psellus. 
Mai. male/. 
Avicen. and 
the Cabal- 
lists. 
The Thal- 
mudists. 
Psellus, <&^<-. 
The Plato- 
nists. 
The Pa- 
pists. 
354. 
49- 
Apoc. 19. 10 
Ibid. 22. 8. 9. 
The Sad- 
duces.

--- PAGE 512 ---
414 
Chap. 3. 
A discourse of 
The third Chapter. 
Pselliis de 
operatione 
damonum , 
cap. 8. 
493- 
Such are 
spirits 
walking 
in white 
sheetes, &c 
Psellus, ibid, 
cap. 9. 
Idem. cap. 10. 
Idem ibid, 
cap. II. 
Oh hethe- 
nish, nay oh 
papistical! 
follie ! 355. 
The opini- 
ons of all 
papists. 
A couse- 
ning kna- 
verie. 
Tke opinion of Pselhis totcching spirits, of their several! orders, 
and a confutation of his errors therein. 
SELLUS being of authoritie in the church of Rome, and 
not impugnable by anie catholike, being also instructed 
in these supernaturall or rather diabolicall matters by a 
monke called Marcus, who had beene familiarlie convers- 
ant a long time, as he said, with a certeine divell, reporteth upon the 
same divels owne word, which must needs understand best the state of 
this question, that the bodies of angels and divels consist not now of all 
one element, though perhaps it were otherwise before the fall of Litcij- 
fer; and that the bodies of spirits and divels can feele and be felt, doo 
hurt and be hurt : in so much as they lament when they are stricken; 
and being put to the fier are burnt, and yet that they themselves 
burne continuallie, in such sort as they leave ashes behind them in 
places where they have beene ; as manifest triall thereof hath beene 
(if he sale truelie) in the borders of Italic. He also saith upon like 
credit and assurance, that divels and spirits doo avoid and shed from 
out of their bodies, such seed or nature, as whereby certeine vermine 
are ingendered ; and that they are nourished with food, as we are, 
saving that they receive it not into their mouthes, but sucke it up 
into their bodies, in such sort as sponges soke up water. Also he 
saith they have names, shapes, and dwelling places, as indeed they 
have, though not in temporall and corporall sort. 
Furthermore, he saith, that there are six principall kind of divels, 
which are not onelie corporall, but temporall and worldlie. The first 
sort consist of fier, wandering in the region neere to the moone, but/ 
have no power to go into the moone. The second sort consisting of 
aire, have their habitation more lowe and neere unto us : these (saith 
he) are proud and great boasters, verie wise and deceitfull, and when 
they come downe are scene shining with streames of fier at their 
taile. He saith that these are commonlie conjured up to make images 
laugh, and lamps burne of their owne accord ; and that in Assyria 
they use much to prophesie in a bason of water. Which kind of 
incantation is usuall among our conjurors : but it is here commonlie 
performed in a pitcher or pot of water ; or else in a violl of glasse 
filled with water, wherin they say at the first a litle sound is heard 
without a voice, which is a token of the divels comming. Anon the 
water seemeth to be troubled, and then there are heard small voices.

--- PAGE 513 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 3. 
wherewith they give their answers, speaking so softlie as no man can 
well heare them : bicause (saith Cardatte) they would not be argued 
or rebuked of lies. But this I have else-where more largelie de- 
scribed and confuted. The third sort of divels Psellus saith are 
earthlie ; the fourth waterie, or of the sea ; the fift under the earth ; 
the sixt sort are Lticifugi, that is, such as delight in darkenes, & are 
scant indued with sense, and so dull, as they can scarse be mooved 
with charmes or conjurations./ 
The same man saith, that some divels are woorse than other, but 
yet that they all hate God, and are enimies to man. But the woorser 
moitie of divels are Aquei, Siibterranei, and Liicifugi-^ that is, 
waterie, under the earth, and shunners of light : bicause (saith he) 
these hurt not the soules of men, but destroie mens bodies like mad 
and ravening beasts, molesting both the inward and outward parts 
thereof. Aquei are they that raise tempests, and drowne seafaring 
men, and doo all other mischeefes on the water. Subterranei and 
Lucifiigi enter into the bowels of men, and torment them that they 
possesse with the phrensie, and the falling evill. They also assault 
them that are miners or pioners, which use to worke in deepe and 
darke holes under the earth. Such divels as are earthie and aierie, 
he saith enter by subtiltie into the minds of men, to deceive them, 
provoking men to absurd and unlawfuU affections. 
But herein his philosophic is verie unprobable, for if the divell be 
earthie, he must needs be palpable; if he be palpable, he must needs 
kill them into whose bodies he entereth. Item, if he be of earth 
created, then must he also be visible and untransformable in that 
point : for Gods creation cannot be annihilated by the creature. So 
as, though it were granted, that they might adde to their substance 
matter and forme, &c : yet is it most certeine, that they cannot 
diminish or alter the substance whereof they consist, as not to be 
(when they list) spirituall, or to relinquish and leave earth, water, 
fier, aier, or this and that element whereof they are created. But 
howsoever they imagine of water, aier, or fier, I am sure earth must 
alwaies be visible and palpable ; yea, and aier must alwaies be invisible, 
and fier must be hot, and water must be moist. And of these 
three latter bodies, speciallie of water and aier, no 
forme nor shape can be exhibited to 
mortall eies naturallie, or by 
the power of anie 
creature.// 
H. Card. lib. 
dcvar. rer. 
16. cap. 93. 
494- 
Divels of 
diverse na- 
tures, and 
their ope- 
rations. 
[» These three 
Ital,] 
The for- 
mer opini- 
on confu- 
ted.

--- PAGE 514 ---
4 I 6 Chap. 4. 
A discourse of 
495. 356. 
The fourth Chapter. 
Fsellus lib. 
dt: opgrat. 
deem. cap. 12. 
If this were 
spoken of 
the temp- 
tations, &c. 
of satan, it 
were tollc- 
rable. 
I. Cor. 12. 
Psfllus. ibid, 
cap. 13. 
If a babe of 
two yeeres 
old throwe 
stones from 
Powles 
steeple, 
they will 
doo hurt, 
&c. 
Howbeit I 
thinke the 
spirit of 
tentation 
to be that 
divell ; & 
therefore 
Christ bid- 
deth us 
watch and 
praie, least 
we be tem- 
ted, &c. 
Pscl. in ope- 
rat. dam, 
cap. 14. 
4g6. 
More absurd assertio7is of Pselltts and stech others, concerniii!^ the 
actio7is and passions of spirits, his definition of them, and of 
his experience therein. 
OREOVER, the same author saith, that spirits whisper 
in our minds, and yet not speaking so lovvd, as our eares 
may heare them : but in such sort as our soules speake 
together when they are dissolved ; making an example 
by lowd speaking a farre off, and a comparison of soft whispering 
neere hand, so as the divell entreth so neere to the mind as the eare 
need not heare him ; and that everie part of a divell or spirit seeth, 
heareth, and speaketh, &c. But herein I will beleeve Pajcle better 
than Pselliis, or his monke, or the moonks divell. For Paicle saith ; 
If the whole bodie were an eie, where were hearing? If the whole 
bodie were hearing, where were smelling, &c. Whereby you may 
see what accord is betwixt Gods word and witchmongers. 
The papists proceed in this matter, and sale, that these spirits use 
great knaverie and unspeakeable bawderie in the breech and middle 
parts of man and woman, by tickeling, and by other lecherous 
devises ; so that they fall jumpe in judgement and opinion, though 
verie erroniouslie, with the foresaid Pselites, of whose doctrine also 
this is a parcell ; to wit, that these divels hurt not cattell for the hate 
they beare unto them, but for love of their naturall and temperate 
heate and moisture, being brought up in deepe, drie and cold places: 
marie they hate the heate of the sun and the fier, bicause that kind 
of heate drieth too fast. They throwe downe stones upon men, but 
the blowes thereof doo no harme to them vvhome they hit ; bicause 
they are not cast with anie force : for (saith he) the divels have little 
and small strength, so as these stones doo nothing but fraie and 
terrific men. as scarecrowes doo birds out of the corne feelds. But 
when these divels enter into the pores, than doo they raise woonder- 
fuU tumults in the bodie/ and mind of man. And if it be a subterrene 
divell, it dooth writh and bow the possessed, and speaketh by him, 
using the spirit of the patient as his instrument. But he saith, that 
when Liicifjigits possesseth a man, he maketh him dumbe, and as it 
were dead : and these be they that are cast out (saith he) onelie by 
fasting and praier. 
The same Psellus, with his mates Bodin and the penners of M. 
Mai. and others, doo find fault with the physicians that affirme such

--- PAGE 515 ---
Divels and spirits. chap 4- 417 
infirmities to be cureable with diet, and not by inchantments ; saieng, 
that physicians doo onlie attend upon the bodie, & that which is 
perceiveable by outward sense ; and that as touching this kind of 
divine philosophic, they have no skill at all. And to make divels and Idem. cap. 17 
spirits seeme yet more corporall and terrene, he saith that certeine 
divels are belonging to certeine countries, and speake the languages 
of the same countries, and none other ; some the Assyrian, some 
the CJialdcean, & some the Persian toong, and that they feele stripes, 
and feare hurt, and speciallie the dint of the sword/ (in which respect 357. 
conjurors have swords with them in their circles, to terrifie them) and 
that they change shapes, even as suddenlie as men doo change colour 
with blushing, feare, anger, and other moods of the mind. He saith 
yet further, that there be brute beasts among them, and yet divels. Beastlike 
and subject to anie kind of death ; insomuch as they are so foolish, '^^ ^' 
as they may be compared to flies, fleas, and wormes, who have no 
respect to any thing but their food, not regarding or remembring the 
hole from out of whence they came last. Marrie divels compounded 
of earth, cannot often transforme themselves, but abide in some one 
shape, such as they best like, and most delight in ; to wit, in the 
shape of birds or women : and therefore the Greeks call them Neidas, 
Nereidas, and Dreidas in the feminine gender ; which Dreidce inha- 
bited (as some write) the ilands beside Scotland called DruidcB, which 
by that meanes had their denomination and name. Other divels that 
dwell in drier places transforme themselves into the masculine kind. 
Finallie Psellics saith they know our thoughts, and can prophesie of 
things to come. His definition is, that they are perpetuall minds in '&^\.Pseiius 
J 1. i. sawe no- 
a passible bodie. thing him- 
To verefie these toies he saith, that he himselfe sawe in a certeine 
night a man brought up by Aletus Libius into a moun/taine, and that 497- 
he tooke an hearbe, and spat thrise into his mouth, and annointed 
his eies with a certeine ointment, so as thereby he sawe great troopes Probable 
of divels, and perceived a crowe to flie into his mouth ; and since stuffe.*^^''* 
that houre he could prophesie at all times, saving on good fridaie, 
and easter sundaie. If the end of this tale were true, it might not 
onelie have satisfied the Greeke church, in keeping the dale of easter, 
togither with the church of Rome ; but might also have made the 
pope (that now is) content with our Christmas and easter daie, and 
not to have gathered the minuts together, and reformed it so, as to 
shew how falsehe he and his predecessors (whome they sale could 
not erre) have observed it hitherto. And trulie this, and the dansing 
of the sunne on easter daie morning sufficienthe or rather miraculous- 
He proveth that computation, which the pope now beginneth to doubt 
of, and to call in question.

--- PAGE 516 ---
4i8 
Chap. 5. 
A discourse of 
Fuse. Curd, 
o/tgrat. di 
dtemon. 
The fift Chapter. 
The opviioji of Fascitis Cardatms touching spirits, and of his 
familiar divell. 
ASCIUS CARDANUS had (as he himselfe and his sonne 
Hieroine Carda?ius report) a familiar divell, consisting of 
the fierie element, who, so long as he used conjuration, 
did give true answers to all his demands : but when he 
burned up his booke of conjurations, though he resorted still unto 
him, yet did he make false answers continuallie. He held him bound 
twentie & eight yeares, and loose five yeares. And during the time 
that he was bound, he told him that there were manie divels or spirits. 
He came not alwaies alone, but sometimes some of his fellowes with 
358. him. He rather a/greed with Psellus than with Plato : for he said 
they were begotten, borne, died, and lived long ; but how long, they 
told him not : howbeit as he might conjecture by his divels face, who 
was 42. yeares old, and yet appeared verie yoong, he thought they 
lived two or three hundred yeares ; and they said that their soules/ 
4gS. and ours also died with their bodies. They had schooles and uni- 
versities among them : but he conceived not that anie were so dull 
headded, as Psellus maketh them. But they are verie quicke in 
credit, that beleeve such fables, which indeed is the groundworke of 
witchcraft and conjuration. But these histories are so grosse and 
palpable, that I might be thought as wise in going about to confute 
them, as to answer the stories of Frier Rush, Adam Bell, or the 
golden Legend. 
The sixt Chapter. 
The Plato- 
nists opi- 
The Opinion of Plato coJtcertiing spirits, divels and angels, what 
sacrifices they like best, what they feare, and of Socrates his 
familiar divell. 
LATO and his followers hold, that good spirits appeare 
in their owne likenesse ; but that evill spirits appeare 
and shew themselves in the forme of other bodies ; and 
 that one divell reigneth over the rest, as a prince dooth 
in everie perfect commonwelth over men. Item, they obteine their 
purposes and desires, onelie by intreatie, of men and women ; bicause

--- PAGE 517 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 6. 
419 
in nature they are their inferiors, and use authoritie over men none 
otherwise than priests by vertue of their function, and bicause of 
religion, wherein (they saie) they execute the office of God. Some- 
times they saie tliat the fierie spirits or supreme substances enter 
into the puritie of the mind, and so obteine their purpose ; sometimes 
otherwise, to wit, by vertue of hohe charmes, and even as a poore 
man obteineth for Gods salce anie thing at a princes hand as it were 
by importunatnesse. 
The other sort of divels and defiled soules are so conversant on 
earth, as that they doo much hurt unto earthhe bodies, speciallie in 
lecherie. Gods and angels (saie they) bicause they want all material] 
and grosse substance, desire most the pure sacrifice of the mind. 
The grosser and more terrestriall spirits desire the grosser sacrifices ; 
as beasts and cattell. They in the middle or/ meane region delight 
to have frankincense, and such meane stuffe offered unto them : and 
therefore (saie they) it is necessarie to sacrifice unto them, all maner 
of things, so the same be slaine, and die not of their owne accord : 
for such they abhorre. Some saie that spirits feare woonderfullie 
vaine threats, and thereupon will depart ; as if you tell them that 
you will cut the heavens in peeces, or reveale their secrets, or com- 
plaine of them to the gods, or saie that you will doo anie impossi- 
bilitie, or such things as they cannot understand ; they are so 
timerous, as they will presentlie be gone : and that is thought the 
best waie to be rid of them. But these be most commonlie of that 
sort or companie,/ which are called Priiicipatus, being of all other 
the most easie to be conjured. 
They saie Socrates had a familiar divell : which Plato relieth much 
upon, using none other argument to proove that there are such spirits, 
but bicause Socrates (that would not lie) said so ; and partlie bicause 
that divell did ever dissuade and prohibit, not onelie in Socrates his 
owne cases, but sometimes in his freends behalfe ; who (if they had 
beene ruled) might through his admonition have saved their lives. 
His disciples gathered that his divell was Saturnall, and a principal! 
fierie divell ; and that he, and all such as doo naturallie know their 
divels, are onlie such as are called Dcemonii viri, otherwise, Cousen- 
ers. Item, they saie that fierie spirits urge men to contemplation, 
the aierie to busines, the waterie to lust ; and among these there are 
some that are Martiall, which give fortitude; some are Joviall, giving 
wisedome ; some Saturniall, alwaies using dissuasion and dehorting. 
Item, some are borne with us, and remaine with us all our life ; some 
are meere strangers, who are nothing else but the soules of men 
departed this life, &c./ 
What kind 
of sacrifices " 
each spirit 
liketh best. 
499- 
359. 
Of Socra- 
tes his pri- 
vate divell 
or familiar 
spirit.

--- PAGE 518 ---
420 
Chap. 7. 
A discourse of 
i
500. 
The seventh Chapter. 
Dionys. in 
cielest. hie- 
rarch. cap. 
9. 10. 
Ephes. 6. 
Dionys. in 
ccelcst. hie- 
rarch. 
J. Calv. lib. 
instil. I- c. 14. 
360. 
501. 
Edw. Dee- 
ring, in lect. 
upon the 
Hebrues 
reading. 6. 
Mai. 3. I. 
Platos nine orders of spirits and angels,^ Dionysius his division 
thereof not much differing from the same., all disprooved by 
learned divines. 
LATO proposeth or setteth foorth nine severall orders of 
spirits, besides the spirits and soules of men. The first 
spirit is God that commandeth all the residue ; the 
second are those that are called Idece., which give all 
things to all men ; the third are the soules of heavenlie bodies which 
are mortall ; the fourth are angels ; the fift archangels ; the sixt are 
divels, who are ministers to infernall powers, as angels are to super- 
nail ; the seventh are halfe gods ; the eight are principalities ; the 
ninth are princes. From which division Dionysius dooth not much 
swarve, saving that he dealeth (as he saith) onelie with good spirits, 
whome he likewise divideth into nine parts or offices. The first he 
calleth Seraphim, the second Cherubim, the third thrones, the fourth 
dominations, the fift vertues, the sixt powers, the seventh principali- 
ties, the eight archangels, the ninth and inferior sort he calleth angels. 
Howbeit, some of these (in my thinking) are evill spirits : or else 
Paule gave us evill counsell, when he willed us to fight against prin- 
cipalities, and powers, and all spirituall wickednes. 
But Dionysius in that place goeth further, impropriating to everie 
countrie, and almost to everie person of anie accompt, a peculiar 
angell ; as to fewrie, he assigneth Michael ; to Adam, Razael ; to 
Abraham, Zakiel ; to Isaach, Raphael; to Jacob, Peliel ; to Moses, 
Metratoji, &c. But in these discourses he either folowed his owne 
imaginations and conceipts, or else the corruptions of that age. 
Nevertheles, I had rather confute him by M. Calvitte, and my 
kinseman M. Deering, than by my selfe, or/ mine owne words. 
For M. Calvine saith, that Dionysitis herein speaketh not as by 
hearesaie, but as though he had slipped downe from heaven, and 
told of things which he had scene. And yet (saith he)/ Paule 
was rapt into the third heaven, and reporteth no such matters. But 
if you read M. Deering upon the first chapter to the Hebrues, you 
shall see this matter notablie handled ; where he saith, that whenso- 
ever archangell is mentioned in the scriptures, it signifieth our saviour 
Christ, and no creature. And certeine it is that Christ himselfe was 
called an angell. The names also of angels, as Michael, Gabriel, 
&^c : are given to them (saith Calvine) according to the capacitie of 
\

--- PAGE 519 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 
our weakenesse. But bicause the decision of this question is neither 
within the compasse of mans capacitie, nor yet of his knowledge, I 
will proceed no further to discusse the same, but to shew the absurd 
opinions of papists and witchmongers on the one side, and the most 
sober and probable collections of the contrarie minded on the other 
side. 
The eight Chapter, 
The commensement of divels fondlie gathered out of the 14. of 
Isaie, of Lucifer and of his fall, the Cabalists the Thalvmdists 
and Schoolemens opinions of the creatioti of angels. 
HE witchmoongers, which are most commonlie bastard 
divines, doo fondlie gather and falselie conceive the 
commensement of divels out of the fourteenth of Isaie ; 
where they suppose Lucifer is cited, as the name of an Isai. 14. 
angell ; who on a time being desirous to be checkemate with God 
himselfe, would needs (when God was gone a litle asside) be sitting 
downe, or rather pirking up in Gods owne principall and cathedrall 
chaire ; and that therfore God cast him and all his confederates out 
of heaven : so as some fell downe from thence to the bottome of the 
earth ; some having descended but into the midle region, and the 
taile of them having not yet passed through the higher region, staled 
even then & there, when God said. Ho. But God knoweth there is 
no such thing ment nor mentioned in that place. For there is onlie 
foreshewed the deposing and deprivation of king Nabuchadnez-zar,\ 
who exalting himselfe in pride (as it were above the starres) esteemed ^02. 
his glorie to surmount all others, as farre as Ltccifer the bright morn- 
ing starre shineth more gloriouslie than the other common starres, 
and was punished by exile, untill such time as he had humbled him- 
selfe ; and therefore metaphoricallie was called Lucifer. 
But forsooth, bicause these great clarkes would be thought method- 
icall, and to have crept out of wisedomes bosome, who rather cralled 
out of follies breeches ; they take upon them to shew us, first, whereof 
these angels that fell from heaven were created ; to wit, of the left The opini- 
side of that massie moold, whereof the world was compounded, the Thain ^ 
which (saie they) was Putredo terra, that is, the rottennesse of the 
earth. The Cabalists, with whome Avicen seemeth to agree, saie that 
one of these begat another :/ others saie, they were made all at once. 361. 
The Greekes doo write that angels were created before the world. 
The Latinists saie they were made the fourth daie, when the starres 
Imu-

--- PAGE 520 ---
42 2 Chap. 9." A discourse of 
Laur.Anan. were made. Laurence Ananias saith, they were made the first daie, 
rftf w.' i""'"'^' ^i^d could not be made the fourth daie, bicause it is written ; Qiiando 
facta stint sidera, latidaveruiit me angeli : so as (saith he) they were 
Craavit" cce- made under the name of the heavens. 
lum &• tet- . , . 1,1 T 1 
ram. There is also a great question among the schoolemen, whether more 
[* Creavii] angels fell downe with Lucifer, or remained in heaven with Michael. 
Vu?g ] ' ' Manie having a bad opinion of the angels honesties, affirme that the 
greater part fell with Lucifer : but the better opinion is (saith 
Lau.Anan. Laurentius Auatiias) that the most part remained. And of them 
d^w. i""'"'^' that thinke so, some sale the tenth part were cast downe, some the 
ninth ; and some gather upon S.fohii, that the third part were onelie 
damned ; bicause it is written, that the dragon with his taile plucked 
downe with him the third part of the starres./ 
The ninth Chapter. 
Lau. Anatt. 
lib. de natur. 
derm. i. 
[t Isai. 14. 12] 
I will settle 
my selfe in 
the north, 
and will be 
like the 
highest. 
[tisai. 14-13, 14] 
Of the co7ite7ition betweene the Greeke ajid Latine chtcrch touching 
the fall of angels, the variance ainong papists themselves herein, 
a conflict betweene Michael and Lucifer. 
HERE was also another contention betweene the Greeke 
church and the Latine ; to wit, of what orders of angels 
they were that did fall with Lticifer. Our schoolemen saie 
they were of all the nine orders of angels in Lucifers 
conspiracie. But bicause the superior order was of the more noble 
constitution and excellent estate, and the inferior of a lesse worthie 
nature, the more part of the inferior orders fell as guiltie and offenders 
with Lticifer. Some saie the divell himselfe was of the inferior order 
of angels, and some that he was of the highest order : bicause it is 
written, Jji cherubim extentus &^ protegens posui te in Jiionte sancto 
Dei. And these saie further, that he was called the dragon, bicause 
of his excellent knowledge. Finallie, these great doctors conclude, 
that the divell himselfe was of the order of seraphim, which is the 
highest, because it is written, Quomodo enini manb oriebaris Lticifer ?\ 
They of this sect affirme, that Cacodcemones 