n merilie to the dice, to the alehouse, 
& to the stewes, and who there so lustie as cousening sir John : who 
indeed this waie made a kind of alcumysticall transformation of monie. 
Now Balbine urged him to go about his businesse, but the other told 
him, that if the matter were once begun, it were halfe ended : for 
therein consisted the greatest difficultie. 
Well, at length he began to furnish the fornace, but now forsooth a 
new supplie of gold must be made, as the seed and spawne of that

--- PAGE 401 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 5. 303 
which must be ingendred and grow out of this worke of Alcumystrie. 
For even as a fish is not caught without a bait, no/ more is gold mul- ^64. 
tiplied without some parcels of gold : and therfore gold must be the 
foundation and groundworke of that art, or else all the fat is in the 
fier. But all this while Balbine was occupied in calculating, and 
musing upon his accompt ; casting by arythmetike, how that if one 
ownce yeelded fifteene, then how much gaines two thousand ownces 
might yeeld : for so much he determined to emploie that waie. 
When the Alcumyst had also consumed this monie, shewing great 
travell a moneth or twaine, in placing the bellowes, the coles, and 
such other stufife, and no whit of profit proceeding or comming there- 
of : Balbine demanded how the world went, our Alcumyst was as a 
man amazed./ Howbeit he said at length ; Forsooth even as such 257. 
matters of importance commonlie doo go forward, wherunto there is 
alwaies verie difficult accesse. There was (saith he) a fault (which I 
have now found out) in the choice of the coles, which were of oke, 
and should have beene of beech. One hundreth duckets were spent 
that waie, so as the dising house and the stewes were partakers of 
Balbines charges. But after a new supplie of monie, better coles were 
provided, and matters more circumspectlie handled. Howbeit, when 
the forge had travelled long, and brought foorth nothing,. there was 
another excuse found out ; to wit, that the glasses were not tempered 
as they ought to have beene. But the more monie was disbursed here- Balbine 
abouts, the woorsse willing was Balbine to give over, according to ^^j^^j'^^J^h' 
the disers veine, whome frutelesse hope bringeth into a fooles desire of 
J. ' r & gold, &c. 
paradise. 
The Alcumyst, to cast a good colour upon his knaverie, tooke on 
like a man moonesicke, and protested with great words full of forgerie 
and lies, that he never had such lucke before. But having found the 
error, he would be sure enough never hereafter to fall into the like 
oversight, and that henceforward all should be safe and sure, and 
throughlie recompensed in the end with large increase. Hereupon 
the workehouse is now the third time repaired, and a new supplie yet 
once againe put into the Alcumysts hand ; so as the glasses were 
changed. And now at length the Alcumyst uttered another point of 
his art and cunning to Balbine ; to wit, that those matters would pro- Notable 
ceed much better, if he sent our Ladie a few French crownes in <:o"senage. 
reward : for the art/ being holie, the matter cannot prosperously j6j. 
proceed, without the favour of the saints. Which counsell exceedinglie 
pleased Balbine, who was so devout and religious, that no daie escaped 
him but he said our Ladie mattens. 
Now our Alcumyster having received the offering of monie, goeth 
on his holie pilgrimage, even to the next village, & there consumeth

--- PAGE 402 ---
304 
14. Booke. 
The discoverie 
The Alcu- 
myster 
bringeth 
Balbin in- 
to a fooles 
paradise. 
Here the 
Alcumy- 
ster utte- 
reth a noto- 
rious point 
of couse- 
ning kna- 
verie. 
it everie penie, among bawds and knaves. And at his returne, he told 
Balbiiie that he had great hope of good lucke in liis businesse ; the 
holie virgine gave such favourable countenance, and such attentive 
eare unto his praiers and vowes. But after this, when there had 
beene great travell bestowed, and not a dram of gold yeelded nor 
levied from the forge ; Balbine began to expostulate and reason some- 
what roundlie with the cousening fellowe ; who still said he never had 
such filthie lucke in all his life before, and could not devise by what 
meanes it came to passe, that things went so overthwartlie. But after 
much debating betwixt them upon the matter, at length it came into 
Balbijies head to aske him if he had not foreslowed to heare masse, 
or to saie his houres : which if he had doone, nothing could prosper 
under his hand. Without doubt (said the cousener) you have hot the 
naile on the head. Wretch that I am ! I remember once or twise 
being at a long feast, I omitted to saie mine Ave Marie after dinner. 
So so (said Balbine') no marvell then that a matter of such importance 
hath had so evill successe. The Alcumyster promised to doo 
penance ; as to heare twelve masses for two that he had fore- 
slowed ; and for everie ^z/e overslipped, to render and repeate twelve 
to our Ladie. 
Soone after this, when all our Alcumysters monie was spent, &also/ 
258. his shifts failed how to come by any more, he came home with this 
devise, as a man woonderfullie fraied and amazed, pitiouslie crieng and 
lamenting his misfortune. Whereat Balbine being astonished, desired 
to knowe the cause of his complaint. Oh (said the Alcumyster) the 
courtiers have spied our enterprise ; so as I for my part looke for 
nothing but present imprisonment. Whereat Balbine was abashed, 
bicause it was flat fellonie to go about that matter, without special! 
licence. But (quoth the Alcumyster) I feare not to be put to death, I 
would it would fall out so : marrie I feare least I shall be shut up 
^66. in some/ castell or towre, and there shall be forced to tug about this 
worke and broile in this businesse all the dales of my life. 
Now the matter being brought to consultation, Balbine, bicause he 
was cunning in the art of rhetorike, and not altogither ignorant in 
lawe, beat his braines in devising how the accusation might be 
answered, and the danger avoided. Alas (said the Alcumyster) you 
trouble your selfe all in vaine, for you see the crime is not to be denied, 
it is so generallie bruted in court : neither can the fact be defended, 
bicause of the manifest lawe published against it. To be short, when 
manie waies were devised, and divers excuses alledged by Balbine, 
and no sure ground to stand on for their securitie ; at length the 
Alcumyster having present want and need of monie, framed his speech 
in this sort ; Sir said he to Balbine, we use slowe counsell, and yet 
'^1

--- PAGE 403 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 5. 305 
the matter requireth hast. For I thinke they are comming for me Marke how 
yer this time to hale me awaie to prison ; and I see no remedie myster go- 
but to die vahanthe in the cause. In good faith (said Balbine) I jpgreeof^ 
knowe not what to saie to the matter. No more do I said the cousenage 
Alcumyster, but that I see these courtiers are hungrie for monie, 
and so much the readier to be corrupted & framed to silence. And 
though it be a hard matter, to give those rakehels till they be 
satisfied : yet I see no better counsell or advise at this time. No 
more could Balbitie, who gave him thirtie ducats of gold to stop 
their mouthes, who in an honest cause would rather have given so 
manie teeth out of his head, than one of those peeces out of his 
pouch. This coine had the Alcumyster, who for all his pretenses 
& gaie gloses was in no danger, other than for lacke of monie 
to leese his leman or concubine, whose acquaintance he would not 
give over, nor forbeare hir companie, for all the goods that he 
was able to get, were it by never such indirect dealing and unlawfuU 
meanes. 
Well, yet now once againe dooth Balbine newlie furnish the forge, 
a praier being made before to our Ladie to blesse the enterprise. And 
all things being provided and made readie according to the Alcumys- 
ters owne asking, & all necessaries largelie ministred after his owne 
liking ; a whole yeare being likewise now consumed about this boot- 
lesse businesse, and nothing brought to passe ; there fell out a 
strange chance, and that by this meanes insuing, as you shall heare./ 
Our Alcumyster forsooth used a little extraordinarie lewd copanie 36"]. 
with a courtiers wife, whiles he was from home, who suspecting the 
matter, came to the doore unlooked for, and called to come in, 
threatning them that he would breake open the doores upon them. 
Some present devise (you see) was now requisite, and there was 
none other to be had,/ but such as the oportunitie offered ; to wit, to 259. 
leape out at a backe window : which he did, not without great hazard, 
and some hurt. But this was soone blazed abroad, so as it came to 
Balbines eare, who shewed in countenance that he had heard heereof, 
though he said nothing. But the Alcumyster knew him to be devout. The miie- 
& somewhat superstitious : and such men are easie to be intreated softeft"na- 
to forgive, how great soever the fault be, and devised to open the tu^isco- 
° . ' ° ' monlie soo- 
matter m maner and forme followmg. nest abused. 
O Lord (saith he before Balbine) how infortunatlie goeth our 
businesse forward ! I marvell what should be the cause. Whereat 
Balbine, being one otherwise that seemed to have vowed silence, 
tooke occasion to speake, saieng ; It is not hard to knowe the impedi- 
ment and stop heereof : for it is sinne that hindereth this matter ; 
which is not to be dealt in but with pure hands. Whereat the Alcumys- 
RR

--- PAGE 404 ---
3o6 
14 Booke. 
The discoverie 
En imniensa 
cavi spirant 
niendacia 
Mies. 
368. 
Balbine is 
ashamed 
that he 
should be 
overshot 
and over- 
seene in a 
case of flat 
cousenage. 
260. 
ter fell upon his knees, beating his breast, & lamentablie cried, saieng ; 
Oh maister Balbine, you saie most trulie, it is sinne that hath doone 
us all this displeasure ; not your sinne sir, but mine owne, good maister 
Balbine. Neither will I be ashamed to discover my filthinesse unto 
you, as unto a most holy and ghostlie father. The infirmitie of the 
flesh had overcome me, and the divell had caught me in his snare. 
Oh wretch that I am ! Of a preest I am become an adulterer. 
Howbeit, the monie that erstwhile was sent to our Ladie, was not 
utterlie lost : for if she had not beene, I had certeinlie beene slaine. 
For the good man of the house brake open the doore, and the win- 
dowe was lesse than I could get out thereat. And in that extremitie 
of danger it came into my mind to fall downe prostrate to the virgine; 
beseeching hir (if our gift were acceptable in hir sight) that she 
would, in consideration thereof, assist me with hir helpe. And to be 
short, I ran to the windowe, and found it bigge enough to leape out 
at. Which thing Balbine did not onelie beleeve to be true, but in 
respect therof forgave him, religiouslie admonishing/ him to shew 
himselfe thankfull to that pitifull and blessed Ladie. 
Now once againe more is made a new supplie of monie, and 
mutuall promise made to handle this divine matter hence forward 
purelie and holilie. To be short, after a great number of such parts 
plaied by the Alcumyster ; one of Balbins acquaintance espied him, 
that knew him from his childhood to be but a cousening merchant; 
and told Balbine what he was, and that he would handle him in the 
end, even as he had used manie others : for a knave he ever was, and 
so he would proove. But what did Balbine, thinke you ? Did he com- 
plaine of this counterfet, or cause him to be punished? No, but he 
gave him monie in his pursse, and sent him awaie ; desiring him, of 
all courtesie, not to blab abroad how he had cousened him. And as 
for the knave Alcumyster, he needed not care who knew it, or what 
came of it : for he had nothing in goods or fame to be lost. And as 
for his cunning in Alcumystrie, he had as much as an asse. By this 
discourse Erasmus would give us to note, that under the golden name 
of Alcumystrie there lieth lurking no small calamitie ; wherein there 
be such severall shifts and sutes of rare subtilties and deceipts, as 
that not onelie welthie men are thereby manie times impoverished, 
and that with the sweete allurement of this art, through their owne 
covetousnesse ;/ as also by the flattering baits of hoped gaine : but 
even wise and learned men hereby are shamefullie overshot, partlie 
for want of due experience in the wiles and subtilties of the world, 
and partlie through the softenesse and pliablenesse of their good 
nature, which cousening knaves doo commonlie abuse to their owne 
lust and commoditie, and to the others utter undooing.

--- PAGE 405 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 6. 307 
The sixt Chapter. 
The opinion of diverse learned me7i totichitig the follie 
of A Icumystrie. 
I LBERT in his booke of minerals reporteth, that Avicenna "^"^^ 
' , . ^ stances of 
treating of Alcumystrie, saith; Let the dealers in Alcumys- things are 
trie understand, that the verie nature and kind of things mutable!' 
cannot be changed,/ but rather made by art to resemble jdg. 
the same in shew and likenesse: so that they are not the verie things 
indeed, but seeme so to be in appearance : as castels and towers 
doo seeme to be built in the clouds, whereas the representations 
there shewed, are nothing else but the resemblance of certeine 
objects beelow, caused in some bright and cleere cloud, when the 
aire is void of thicknes and grossenes. A sufficient proofe hereof 
male be the looking glasse. And we see (saith he) that yellow or 
orrenge colour laid upon red, seemeth to be gold. Francis Petrarch Franc. Pe- 
treating of the same matter in forme of a dialogue, introduceth a dis- nmed. uti: 
ciple of his, who fansied the foresaid fond profession and practise, '^«/'- 'o- 
saieng ; I hope for prosperous successe in Alcumystrie. Petrarch 
answereth him ; It is a woonder from whence that hope should 
spring, sith the frute thereof did never yet fall to thy lot, nor yet at 
anie time chance to anie other ; as the report commonlie goeth, that 
manie rich men, by this vanitie and madnes have beene brought to 
beggerie, whiles they have wearied themselves therewith, weakened 
their bodies, and wasted their wealth in trieng the means to make 
gold ingender gold. I hope for gold according to the workemans 
promise, saith the disciple. He that hath promised thee gold, will 
runne awaie with thy gold, and thou never the wiser, saith Petrarch. 
He promiseth mee great good, saith the disciple. He will first serve 
his owne turne, and releeve his private povertie, saith Petrarch ; for 
Alcumysters are a beggerlie kind of people, who though they con- 
fesse themselves bare and needie, yet will they make others rich and 
welthie : as though others povertie did more molest and pitie them 
than their owne. These be the words of Petrarch, a man of great 
learning and no lesse experience ; who as in his time he sawe the 
fraudulent fetches of this compassing craft : so hath there beene no 
age, since the same hath beene broched, wherein some few wisemen 
have not smelt out the evill meaning of these shifting merchants, 
and bewraied them to the world. 
An ancient writer of a religious order, who lived above a thousand 
Coschalctts 
Boll, ordinis

--- PAGE 406 ---
3o8 
14 Booke. 
The discoverie 
No certein 
ground in 
the art AI- 
cumj'Sticall. 
S.August. in yeares since, discovering the diversities of theftes, after a long enumera- 
^riojol^i'^. tion, bringeth in Alcumysters,whomhe caWtih Falsijicantes jnetallonan 
coi.b. c.d.&j' \. yjifigfaliinn, wlches and counterfetters of metals and minerals ; 
261. jyo. and settetl:/ them as deepe in the/ degree of theeves, as anie of the 
rest, whose injurious dealings are brought'to open arreignment. It 
is demanded (saith he) why the art of Alcumystrie doth never proove 
that in effect, which it pretendeth in precept and promise. The 
answer is readie ; that if by art gold might be made, then were it 
behoovefull to know the maner and proceeding of nature in genera- 
tion ; sith art is said to imitate and counterfet nature. Againe, it is 
bicause of the lamenesse and unperfectnesse of philosophic, speciallie 
concerning minerals: no such manner of proceeding being set downe 
by consent and agreement of philosophers in writing, touching the 
true and undoubted effect of the same. Where upon one suppos- 
eth that gold is made of one kind of stuffe this waie, others of 
another kind of stufYe that waie. And therefore it is a chance if anie 
atteine to the artificiall applieng of the actives and passives of gold 
and silver. Moreover, it is certeine, that quicke silver and sulphur 
are the materials (as they terme them) of mettals, and the agent is 
heate, which directeth : howbeit it is verie hard to know the due pro- 
portion of the mixture of the materials ; which proportion the genera- 
tion of gold doth require. And admit that by chance they atteine to 
such proportion ; yet can they not readilie resume or doo it againe in 
another worke, bicause of the hidden diversities of materials, and 
the uncerteintie of applieng the actives and passives. 
The same ancient author concluding against this vaine art, saith, 
that of all christian lawmakers it is forbidden, and in no case tollerable 
in anie commonwelth : first bicause it presumeth to forge idols for 
covetousnes, which are gold and silver ; whereupon saith the 
apostle, Covetousenesse is idolworship : secondlie, for that (as 
Arisiotle saXth) coine should be skant and rare, that it might be 
deere ; but the same would waxe vile, and of small estimation, if by 
the art of Alcumystrie gold and silver might be multiplied : thirdlie, 
bicause (as experience prooveth) wisemen are thereby bewitched, 
couseners increased, princes abused, the rich impoverished, the 
poore beggered, the multitude made fooles, and yet the craft and 
craftesmaisters (oh madnes !) credited. Thus far he. Whereby in 
few words he discountenanceth that profession, not by the imagina- 
tions of his owne braine, but by manifold circumstances of mani- 
jyi. fest proofe. Touching the which practise 1/ thinke inough hath 
beene spoken, and more a great deale than needed ; sith so 
plaine and demonstrable a matter requireth the lesse travell in con- 
futation. 
Idem ibid. 
Avaritia 
idoloru m 
cultus.

--- PAGE 407 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. ^. 309 
The seventh Chapter. 
That vaine and deceitfull hope is a great cause why men are 
seduced by this alluring art, and that there labours therein are 
bootelesse, &^c. 
ITHERTO somewhat at large I have detected the knaverie 
of the art Alcumysticall, partlie by reasons, and partlie by 
examples : so that the thing it selfe male no lesse appeare 
to the judiciall eie of the considerers ;/ than the bones 262. 
and sinewes of a bodie anatomized, to the corporall eie of the be- 
holders. Now it shall not be amisse nor impertinent, totreate some- 
what of the nature of that vaine and frutelesse hope, which induceth Ofvaine 
and draweth men forward as it were with chordes, not onelie to the 
admiration, but also to the approbation of the same : in such sort 
that some are compelled rufullie to sing (as one in old time did, 
whether in token of good or ill lucke, I doo not now well remember) 
Spes fortuna valete ; Hope and good hap adieu. 
No mervell then though Alcumystrie allure men so sweetlie, and 
intangle them in snares of foUie ; sith the baits which it useth is the 
hope of gold, the hunger wherof is by the poet termed Sacra, which 
some doo English, Holie ; not understanding that it is rather to be 
interpreted, *Curssed or detestable, by the figure Acyron, when a ^j.Cal.in 
word of an unproper signification is cast in a clause as it were a cloud: ^^^/^"^^ 
or by the figure Antiihrasis, when a word importeth a contrarie serm. 127. 
meanmg to that which it commonlie hath. For what reason can there nuvibcr. 40. 
be, that the hunger of gold should be counted holie, the same having 
(as depending upon it) so manie milians of mischeefes and miseries : 
as treasons, theftes, adulteries, manslaughters, trucebreakings, per- 
juries, cousenages, and a great troope of other enormities, which were 
here too long/ to rehearse. And if the nature of everie action be 372. 
determinable by the end thereof, then cannot this hunger be holie, A maxime. 
but rather accurssed, which pulleth after it as it were with iron 
chaines ^ch a band of outrages and enormities, as of all their 
labor, charge, care and cost, &c : they have nothing else left them 
in lieu of lucre, but onlie some few burned brickes of a ruinous 
fornace, a pecke or two of ashes, and such light stuffe, which they 
are forced peradventure in fine to sell, when beggerie hath arrested 
and laid his mace on their shoulders. As for all their gold, it is 
resolved In primam materiajn, or rather In levem quendam fumu- 
lum, into a light smoke or fumigation of vapors, than the which

--- PAGE 408 ---
14. Booke. 
The discoverie 
nothing is more light, nothing lesse substantial!, spirits onelie 
excepted, out of whose nature and number these are not to be 
exempted. 
The eight Chapter. 
Erasmus tn 
colloq. cui ti- 
iultis Ccnvi- 
vium fabii- 
losum. 
263. 
373- 
A hungrie 
bellie will 
not be bri- 
deled. 
A contimtation of the former matter, with a conclusion of the 
same. 
HAT which I have declared before, by reasons, examples, 
and authorities, I will now prosecute and conclude by 
one other example ; to the end that we, as others in 
former ages, male judge of vaine hope accordinglie, and 
be no lesse circumspect to avoid the inconveniences therof, than 
Ulysses was warie to escape the incantations of Circes that old trans- 
forming witch. Which example of mine is drawne from Lewes the 
French king, the eleventh of that name, who being on a time at 
Burgundie, fell acquainted by occasion of hunting with one Conoti, a 
clownish but yet an honest and hartie good fellow. For princes and 
great men de/light much in such plaine clubhutchens. The king 
oftentimes, by meanes of his game, used the countrimans house for 
his refreshing ; and as noble men sometimes take pleasure in homelie 
and course things, so the king did not refuse to eate turnips and rape 
rootes in Cottons cotage. Shortlie after king Lewes being at his 
pallace, void of troubles and disquietnesse, Conons wife/ wild him to 
repaire to the court, to shew himselfe to the king, to put him in mind 
of the old intertainement which he had at his house, and to present 
him with some of the fairest and choisest rape rootes that she had in 
store. Conofi seemed loth, alledging that he should but lose his 
labour : for princes (saith he) have other matters in hand, than to 
intend to thinke of such trifeling courtesies. But Cottons wife over- 
came him, and persuaded him in the end, choosing a certeine number 
of the best and goodhest rape rootes that she had : which when she 
had given hir husband to carrie to the court, he set forward on his 
journie a good trudging pase. But Conoti being tempted by the waie, 
partlie with desire of eating, and partlie with the toothsom^es of the 
meate which he bare, that by little and little he devoured up all the 
roots saving one, which was a verie faire and a goodlie great one 
indeed. Now when Conon was come to the court, it was his lucke to 
stand in such a place, as the king passing by, and spieng the man, 
did well remember him, and commanded that he should be brought 
in. Conott verie cheerelie followed his guide hard at the heeles, and 
no sooner sawe the king, but bluntlie comming to him, reached out

