chael 
Werdon, having turned themselves with an ointment into woolves, 
killed, and finallie did eate up an infinite number of people. Which 
lie Wierus dooth sufficientlie confute. But untill you see and read 
that, consider whether Peter could eate rawe flesh without sur- 
fetting, speciallie flesh of his owne kind. Item, that there was an 
arrowe shot into a woolves thigh, who afterwards being turned into his 
go. 
Pudendis tunc 
primkm crtim- 
fc^itibiis. 
Jo. Wier. lib. 6. 
de mag ca. 12.

--- PAGE 170 ---
72 
5. Booke. 
The discoverie 
J. Bodinus 
mendaciorum 
'*heluo. 
["Text heluo.'] 
70. 
A warme season 
to swim in. 
I merv'cll that 
they forsake not 
the divell, who 
punisheth them 
so sore : ywis 
they get not so 
much at his p/. 
hands. 
Leviti. i6. [26,22] 
Deut. 32. [v. 24] 
former shape of a man, was found in his bed, with the arrowe in his 
thigh, which the archer that shot it knew verie well. Item, that 
another being Lycaiithropiis in the forme of a woolfe, had his woolves 
feet cut off, and in a moment he became a man without hands or 
feete. 
He accuseth also one of the mightiest princes in christendome, 
even of late daies, to be one of those kind of witches (so as he could, 
when he list, turne himselfe to a woolfe) affirming that he was espied 
and oftentimes seene to performe that villanie ; bicause he would be 
counted the king of all witches. He saith that this transubstantiation 
is most common in Greece^! and through out all Asia, as merchant 
strangers have reported to him. For Anno Domini. 1542, when 
Sultan Solimojt reigned, there was such force and multitude of 
these kind of woolves in Cottstantinople, that the emperour drave 
togither in one flocke 150. of them, which departed out of the citie in 
the presence of all the people. 
To persuade us the more throughlie heerein, he saith, that in 
Livofiia, yearelie (about the end of December) a certeine knave or 
divell warneth all the witches in the countrie to come to a certeine 
place : if they faile, the divell commeth and whippeth them with an 
iron rod ; so as the print of his lashes remaine upon their bodies for 
ever. The capteine witch leadeth the waie through a / great poole of 
water : manie millians of witches swim after. They are no 'sooner 
passed through that water, but they are all transformed into woolves, 
and flie upon and devoure both men, women, cattell, &c. After twelve 
daies they returne through the same water, and so receive humane 
shape againe. 
Item, that there was one Bajamts a Jew, being the sonne of Simeon, 
which could, when he list, turne himselfe into a woolfe ; and by that 
meanes could escape the force and danger of a whole armie of men. 
Which thing (saith Bodin) is woonderfull: but yet (saith he) it is much 
more marvelous, that men will not beleeve it. For manie poets 
affirme it ; yea, and if you looke well into the matter (saith he) you 
shall find it easie to doo. Item, he saith, that as naturall woolves per- 
secute beasts; so doo these magicall woolves devoure men, women, and 
children. And yet God saith to the people (I trowe) and not to the 
cattell of Israeli ; If you observe not my commandements, I will send 
among you the beasts of the feeld, which shall devoure both you and 
your cattell. Item, I will send the teeth of beasts upon you. Where is 
Bodins distinction now become ? He never saith, I will send witches 
in the likenes of wolves, &c : to devoure you or your cattell. 
Nevertheles, Bodin saith it is a cleare case : for the matter was dis- 
puted upon before pope Leo the seventh, and by him all these matters

--- PAGE 171 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. I. 
73 
were judged possible : and at that time (saith he) were the' transforma- 
tions of Ltician and Apideins made canonicall. 
Furthermore he saith, that through this art they are so cunning that 
no man can apprehend them, but when they are a sleepe. Item, he 
nameth another witch, that (as M. Mai. saith) could not be caught, 
bicause he would transforme himselfe into a mouse, and runne into 
everie little hole, till at length he was killed comming out of the hole of 
a jamme in a windowe : which indeed is as possible, as a camell to go 
through a needels eie. Item, he saith, that diverse witches at Vernon 
turned themselves into cats, and both committed and received much 
hurt. But at Argentine there was a wonderfull matter done, by three 
witches of great wealth, who transforming themselves into three cats, 
assalted a faggot-maker : who having hurt them all with a faggot 
sticke, was like to have beene put to death. But he was miraculouslie 
delivered, and they worthilie punished ; as the storie saith, from 
whence/ Bodin had it. 
After a great manie other such beastlie fables, he inveieth against 
■ such physicians, as saie that Lycanthropia is a disease, and not a 
transformation. Item, he mainteineth, as sacred and true, all Homers 
fables of Circes and/ Ulyffes his companions : inveieng against Chry- 
sostotne, who rightlie interpreteth *^i3mers meaning to be, that Ulyffes 
his people were by the harlot Circes made in their brutish maners to 
resemble swine. 
But least some poets fables might be thought lies (whereby the 
witchmongers arguments should quaile) he mainteineth for true the 
most part of Ovids Metamorphosis, and the greatest absurdities and 
impossibilities in all that booke : marie he thinketh some one tale 
therein may be fained. Finallie, he confirmeth all these toies by the 
storie of Nabuchadnez-zar. And bicause (saith he) Nabuchadnez-zar 
continued seven yeres in the shape of a beast, therefore may witches 
remaine so long in the forme of a beast ; having in all the meane 
time, the shape, haire, voice, strength, agilitie, swiftnes, food and 
excrements of beasts, and yet reserve the minds and soules of 
women or men. Howbeit, .S. Augustine (whether to confute or con- 
firme that opinion judge you) saith ; Non est credendtmt, hutnanum 
corpus dcemonum arte vel potestate in bestialia lineamenta 
converti posse : We may not beleeve that a mans bodie may be 
altered into the lineaments of a beast by the divels art or power. 
Item, Bodin saith, that the reason whie witches are most commonlie 
turned into woolves, is ; bicause they usuallie eate children, as 
woolves eate cattell. Item, that the cause whie other are truelie 
turned into asses, is ; for that such have beene desirous to understand 
the secrets of witches. Whie witches are turned into cats, he 
Stasus a witch 
could not be 
apprehended, 
and why ? 
J. Bodin. 
Mai. male/. 
John. Bodin. 
Mai. vialef. 
Barth. Spin. 
Mai. male/, 
part. 3. 
92. 
An error about 
Lycanthropia. 
71. 
[»Sic.] 
A ugust. lib. 8 
de civil. Dei. 
cap. 18. 
Idem. lib. de 
sfiritu &'anima, 
cap. 26.

--- PAGE 172 ---
74 
5, Booke. 
The discoverie 
alledgeth ns reason, and therefore (to helpe him foorth with that 
Ironia. paraphrase) I saie, that witches are curst qiieanes, and manie times 
scratch one another, or their neighbours by the faces ; and therefore 
perchance are turned into cats. But I have put twentie of these 
witchmongers to silence with this one question ; to wit, Whetlier a 
witch that can turne a woman into a cat, &c : can also turne a cat 
into a woman ?/ 
93- 
J. Bod. lib. 2. 
de mag. damon, 
cap. 6. 
Gen. 19, 14. «9 
&-26. &27. 
y. Bod lib. de 
dcemon. 2. 
cap. 20. 
M. Mai. pa. I. 
qua. 9. 
94- 
fnhn. Bodin. lib. 
de drenion. 2. 
cap. I. 
The second Chapter. 
Absurd reasons brought by Bodin, and such others, for coiifirtnation 
0/ transformations. 
HESE Examples and reasons might put us in doubt, that 
everie asse, woolfe, or cat that we see, were a man, a 
woman, or a child. I marvell that no man useth this 
distinction in the definition of a man. But to what end 
should one dispute against these creations and recreations ; when 
Bodin washeth away all our arguments with one word, confessing that 
none can create any thing but God ; acknowledging also the force of 
the canons, and imbracing the opinions of such divines, as write 
against him in this behalfe ? Yea he dooth now (contrarie to him- 
selfe elsewhere) affirme, that the divell cannot alter his forme. And 
lo, this is his distinction. Nan essentialis forma (id est ratio) sedfigura 
solum perjnutatur : The essential! forme (to wit, reason) is not 
changed, but the shape or figure. And thereby he prooveth it easie 
enough to create men or beasts with life, so as they remaine without 
reason. Howbeit, I thinke it is an easier matter, to turne Bodins 
reason into the reason of an asse, than his bodie into the shape of a 
sheepe : which he saith is an easie matter ; bicause Lots / wife was 
turned into a stone by the divell. Whereby he sheweth his grosse 
ignorance. As though God that commanded Z^?/ upon paine of death 
not to looke backe, who also destroied the citie of Sodome at that 
instant, had not also turned hir into a salt stone. And as though 
all this while God had beene the divels drudge, to go about this 
businesse all the night before, and when a miracle should be wrought, 
the divell must be faine to doo it himselfe. 
Item, he affirmeth, that these kind of transfigurations are more 
common with them in the west parts of the world, than with us here 
in the east. Howbeit, this note is given withall ; that that is ment of 
the second persons, and not of the first : to wit, of the bewitched, and 
not of the witches. For they can trans/forme themselves in everie 
part of the world, whether it be east, west, north, or south. Marrie he 
saith, that spirits and divels vex men most in the north countries, as

--- PAGE 173 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 3. 
75 
Norway, Finland, : and in the westerne ilands, as in the west 
India : but among the heathen speciallie, and wheresoever Christ is 
not preached. And that is true, though not in so fooHsh, grosse, and 
corporall a sense as Bodin taketh it. One notable instance of a 
witches cunning in this behalfe touched by Bodin in the chapter 
aforesaid, I thought good in this place to repeat : he taketh it out of 
M. Mai. which tale was delivered to Sprenger by a knight of the 
Rhods, being of the order of S. Jones at Jerusalem ; and it followeth 
thus. 
Mai. maltfic. 
far. 2. qua:. 2. 
cap. 4. 
The third Chapter. 
0/ a man turned into an asse, and retnr^ted againe into a mati by 
one of Bodins witches : S. Augiistines opinion thereof. 
T happened in the city of Salaniin, in the kingdome of 
Cyprus (wherein is a good haven) that a ship loaden with 
merchandize staied there for a short space. In the meane 
time many of the souldiers and mariners went to shoare, 
to provide fresh victuals. Among which number, a certaine English 
man, being a sturdie yoong fellowe, went to a womans house, a little 
waie out of the citie, and not farre from the sea side, to see whether 
she had anie egs to sell. Who perceiving him to be a lustie yoong 
fellowe, a stranger, and farre from his countrie (so as upon the losse 
of him there would be the lesse misse or inquirie) she considered 
with hir selfe how to destroie him ; and willed him to stale there 
awhile, whilest she went to fetch a few egs for him. But she tarried 
long, so as the yoong man called unto hir, desiring hir to make hast : 
for he told hir that the tide would be spent, and by that meanes his 
ship would be gone, and leave him behind. Howbeit, after some 
detracting of time, she brought him a few egs, willing him to returne to 
hir, if his ship were gone when he came. The young fel/lowe returned 
towards his ship : but before he went aboord, hee would needs eate 
an eg or twaine to satisfie his hunger, and within short space he 
became dumb and out of his wits (as he afterwards said.) When he 
would have entred into the ship, the mariners beat him backe with a 
cudgell, saieng ; What a murren lacks the asse ? Whi/ther the divell 
will this asse ? The asse or yoong man (I cannot tell by which name 
I should terme him) being many times repelled, and understanding 
their words that called him asse, considering that he could speake 
never a word, and yet could understand everie bodie ; he thought 
that he was bewitched by the woman, at whose house he was. And 
therefore, when by no meanes he could get into the boate, but was 
driven to tarrie and see hir departure ; being also beaten from place 
What the divel 
shuld the witch 
meane to make 
chois of the 
English man ? 
95- 
A strange meta- 
morphusis, of 
bodie. but not 
of mind. 
73.

--- PAGE 174 ---
76 
5. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Note the devo- 
tion of the asse. 
g6. 
August lib. i8. 
de civi. Dei. 
cap. 17 ds 18. 
At the alps in 
Arcadia. 
to place, as an asse : he remembred the witches words, and the 
words of his owne fellowes that called him asse, and returned to the 
witches house, in whose service hee remained by the space of three 
yeares, dooing nothing with his hands all that while, but carried such 
burthens as she laied on his backe ; having onelie this comfort, that 
although he were reputed an asse among strangers and beasts, yet 
that both this witch, and all other witches knew him to be a man. 
After three yeares were passed over, in a morning betimes he went 
to towne before his dame ; who upon some occasion (of like to make 
water) staled a little behind. In the meane time being neere to a 
church, he heard a little saccaring bell ring to the elevation of a 
morrowe masse, and not daring to go into the church, least he should 
have beene beaten and driven out with cudgels, in great devotion he 
fell downe in the churchyard, upon the knees of his hinder legs, and 
did lift his forefeet over his head, as the preest doth hold the sacra- 
ment at the elevation. Which prodigious sight when certeine 
merchants of Genua espied, and with woonder beheld ; anon commeth 
the witch with a cudgell in hir hand, beating foorth the asse. And 
bicause (as it hath beene said) such kinds of witchcrafts are verie 
usuall in those parts ; the merchants aforesaid made such meanes, as 
both the asse and the witch were attached by the judge. And she 
being examined and set upon the racke, confessed the whole matter, 
and promised, that if she might have libertie to go home, she would 
restore him to his old/ shape : and being dismissed, she did according- 
lie. So as notwithstanding they apprehended hir againe, and burned 
hir: and the yoong man returned into his countrie with a joifull and 
merrie hart. 
Upon the advantage of this storie M. Mai. Bodtn, and the residue 
of the witchmongers triumph; and speciallie bicause S. Augustine 
subscribeth thereunto; or at the least to the verie like. Which I 
must confesse I find too common in his books, insomuch as I judge 
them rather to be foisted in by some fond papist or witchmonger, than 
so learned a mans dooings. The best is, that he himselfe is no eie- 
witnesse to any of those his tales; but speaketh onelie by report; 
wherein he uttereth these words : to wit, that It were a point of great 
incivilitie, &c: to discredit so manie and so certeine reports. And in 
that respect he justifieth the corporall transfigurations of Ulysses his 
mates, throgh the witchcraft of Circes : and that foolish fable of 
PrcBstantius his father, who (he saith) did eate provender and haie 
among other horsses, being himselfe turned into an horsse. Yea he 
verifieth the starkest lie that ever was invented, of the two alewives 
that used to transforme all their ghests into horsses, and to sell them 
awaie at markets and faires. And therefore I saie with Cardamis,

--- PAGE 175 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 4. 
77 
Card, de Var. 
rerum. lib. 15 
cap. 80. 74. 
August. Lib. 18. 
de civit. Dei. 
[*Rom.] 
Englished by 
Abraham 
Fleming. 
97- 
Canon. J6. 
qua. 5. episcopi 
that how much Augtistin saith he hath seen with his eies, so much I 
am/ content to beleeve. Howbeit S. Augustin concludeth against 
Bodin. For he affirmeth these transubstantiations to be but fantas- 
tical!, and that they are not according to the veritie, but according to 
the appearance. And yet I cannot allow of such appearances made 
by witches, or yet by divels ; for I find no such power given by God 
to any creature. And I would wit of S. Augustine., where they be- 
came, whom Bodins transformed woolves devoured. But 
 6 qucim 
Credula mens kominis, erectcB fabttlis aures ! 
* Good Lord ! how light of credit is 
the wavering mind of?nan / 
How unto tales and lies his eares 
attentive all they can fj 
Generall councels, and the popes canons, which so regardeth, 
doo condemne and pronounce his opinions in this behalfe to be 
absurd; and the residue of the witchmongers, with himselfe in the 
number, to be woorsse than infidels. And these are the verie words 
of the canons, which else-where I have more largelie repeated; Who- 
soever beleeveth, that anie creature can be made or changed into e^^con. acquir. 
better or woorsse, or transformed into anie other shape, or into anie 
other similitude, by anie other than by God himselfe the creator of all 
things, without all doubt is an infidell, and woorsse than a pagan. 
And therewithall this reason is rendered, to wit : bicause they 
attribute that to a creature, which onelie belongeth to God the creator 
of all things. 
The fourth Chapter. 
A summarie of the former fable, with a refutation thereof, after due 
examination of the satne. 
ONCERNING the veritie or probabilitie of this enterlude, 
betwixt Bodin, M. Mai. the witch, the asse, the masse, 
the merchants, the inquisitors, the tormentors, &c: First 
I woonder at the miracle of transubstantiation: Secondlie 
at the impudencie of Bodin and fames Spre7iger, for affirming so 
grosse a lie, devised beelike by the knight of the Rhodes, to make a 
foole of Sprenger, and an asse of Bodin : Thirdlie, that the asse had 
no more wit than to kneele downe and hold up his forefeete to a peece 
of starch or flowre, which neither would, nor could, nor did helpe him: 
Fourthlie, that the masse could not reforme that which the witch 
transformed: Fiftlie, that the merchants, the inquisitors, and the tor- 
mentors, could not either severallie or jointlie doo it, but referre the 
matter to the witches courtesie and good pleasure.

--- PAGE 176 ---
78 
5. Booke. 
The discoverie 
His shipe was 
in the woods : 
where else 
should it be ? 
75. 
Mai. niiiUf. 
par. I. quce. 2. 
In my discourse 
of spirits and 
divels, being the 
17 booke of this 
volume. 
Dan. in dialog, 
cat. 5- 
99- 
August, lib. de 
iivit. Dei. cap. 
17- '8- 
But where was the yoong mans owne shape all these three yeares, 
wherein he was made an asse ? It is a certeine and a general! rule, 
that two substantial! formes cannot be in one subject Simul Ss^ semel, 
both at once: which is confessed by themselves. The/ forme of the 
beast occupied some/ place in the aire, and so I thinke should the 
forme of a man doo also. For to bring the bodie of a man, without 
feeling, into such a thin airie nature, as that it can neither be seene 
nor felt, it may well be unlikelie, but it is verie impossible: for the 
aire is inconstant, and continueth not in one place. So as this airie 
creature would soone be carried into another region: as else-where I 
have largelie prooved. But indeed our bodies are visible, sensitive, 
and passive, and are indued with manie other excellent properties, 
which all the divels in hell are not able to alter: neither can one haire 
of our head perish, or fall awaie, or be transformed, without the 
special! providence of God almightie. 
But to proceed unto the probabilitie of this storie. What lucke was 
it, that this yoong fellow of England, landing so latelie in those parts, 
and that old woman of Cyprus, being both of so base a condition, 
should both understand one anothers communication; Enoland a.xidi 
Cyprus being so manie hundred miles distant, and their languages so 
farre differing ? I am sure in these dales, wherein trafficke is more 
used, and learning in more price; few yong or old mariners in this 
realme can either speake or understand the language spoken at 
Salainin in Cyprus, which is a' kind of Greeke; and as few old women 
there can speake our language. But Bodin will sale; You heare, that 
at the inquisitors commandement, and through the tormentors correc- 
tion, she promised to restore him to his owne shape: and so she did, 
as being thereunto compelled. I answer, that as the whole storie is 
an impious fable; so this assertion is false, and disagreeable to their 
owne doctrine, which mainteineth, that the witch dooth nothing but 
by the permission and leave of God. For if she could doo or undoo 
such a thing at hir owne pleasure, or at the commandement of the 
inquisitors, or for feare of the tormentors, or for love of the partie, or 
for remorse of conscience: then is it not either by the extraordinarie 
leave, nor yet by the like direction of God; except you will make him 
a confederate with old witches. I for my part woonder most, how 
they can turne and tosse a mans bodie so, and make it smaller and 
greater, to wit, like a mowse, or like an asse, &c: and the man all this 
while to feele no paine. And I am not alone in this maze: for 
Danceus a special mainteiner of their fol/lies saith, that although 
Augustine and Apuleius doo write verie crediblie of these matters ; 
yet will he never beleeve, that witches can change men into other 
formes ; as asses, apes, woolves, beares, mice, &c.

--- PAGE 177 ---
of Witchcraft. chup. 5. 79 
The fift Chapter. 
That the bodie of a man cannot be turned into the bodie of a beast by 
a witch, is prooved by strong reasons, scriptures, and atethorities. 
UT was this man an asse all this while ? Or was this 
asse a man ? Bodin saith (his reason onelie reserved) he 
was trulie transubstantiated into an asse ; so as there 
must be no part of a man, but reason remaining in this 
asse. And yet Hermes Trismegistus thinketh he hath good authoritie Hermes TrUme, 
and reason to sale ; Aliud corpus qucim hiiinajium non capere animain 'Jl^''" 
hu/nanam ; necjfas esse in corpus atii/nce ratio7ie carditis aniinam 76. 
rationaleiii corruere ; that is ; An humane soule cannot receive anie 
other than an humane bodie, nor yet canne light into a bodie that 
wanteth reason of mind. But S. fames saith; the bodie without the Jam. a. 26. 
spirit is dead. And surelie, when the soule is departed from the 
bodie, the life of man is dissolved: and therefore Paule wished to be Phiii. i, 33. 
dissolved, when he would have beene with Christ. The bodie of man 
is subject to divers kinds of agues, sicknesses, and infirmities, where- 
unto an asses bodie is not inclined: and mans bodie must be fed with 
bread, (Sic : and not with hay. Bodins asseheaded man must either 
eate haie, or nothing: as appeareth in the storie. Mans bodie also is 
subject unto death, and hath his dales numbred. If this fellowe had 
died in the meane time, as his houre might have beene come, for anie 
thing the divels, the witch, or Bodin knew; I mervell then what would 
have become of this asse, or how the witch could have restored him 
to shape, or whether he should have risen at the dale of judgement in 
an asses bodie and shape. For Paule saith, that that verie bodie i Cor. 15. 44. 
which is sowne and buried anaturall bodie, is raised/ a spirituall bodie. 100. 
The life of Jesus is made manifest in our mortall flesh, and not in the 
flesh of an asse. 
God hath endued everie man and everie thing with his proper 
nature, substance, forme, qualities, and gifts, and directeth their 
waies. As for the waies of an asse, he taketh no such care : howbeit, 
they have also their properties and substance severall to themselves. 
For there is one flesh (saith Paule) of men, another flesh of beasts, i. Cor. 15, 39. 
another of fishes, another of birds. And therefore it is absolutelie 
against the ordinance of God (who hath made me a man) that I should 
flie like a bird, or swim like a fish, or creepe like a worme, or become 
an asse in shape: insomuch as if God would give me leave, I cannot 
doo it; for it were contrarie to his owne order and decree, and to the 
constitution of anie bodie which he hath made. Yea the spirits them- Psai. 119.

