th brought the Spirits to this length, 
he may ask what ever he desireth, and they will answer him, provided 
the questions belong to that order whereof they are. 
Now the properties wherein they excel, are these ; They can give 
the gift of Invisibility, and the fore-knowledge of the change of 
weather ; they can teach the Exorcist how to excite Storms and Tem- 
pests, and how to calm them again ; they can bring news in an hours 
space of the success of any Battle, Seidge, or Navy, how farr off soever; 
they can also teach the language of Birds, and how to fly through 
the air invisibly./ 
'Twas through the assistance of these airy Spirits, that Chanchian- 
cungi, the Tartarian Emperour did give the Chijiois such a desperate 
rout near the year 1646. for it is reported, that he had constantly in 
his presence two Magicians, named Ran and Sionatn, who perceived 
every motion of the China''s Army, and had intelligence by these 
Spirits of the Emperours private Counsels and Consultations. 
And it is credibly reported by Magicians, that wonderful things may 
be with facility effected through the assistance of these aforesaid 
Spirits, so that the Exorcist must be very affable unto them, and 
gently dismiss them (when he is satisfied) in this following manner ; 
Seeing ye have willingly answered all our Interrogations and de- 
sires, we give you leave and licefice. In the Name of the Father, Son,

--- PAGE 581 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. vii. 
483 
and Holy-Ghost, to depart urito your place, and be ever ready to attend 
our call ; Depart, I say, in peace, and peace be confirmed betwixt us 
and you. Amen. *^ ^ 
After all these Ceremonies are finished, the Spirits will begin to 
depart, making obeysance as they go ; and then the Master must 
demolish the Circle, and taking up all the Utensils repeat the Pater 
Noster as they are going away from the place of Conjuration. 
Chap. VII. 
How to obtain the familiarity of the Genius or Good Angel, and 
cause him to appear. 
According to the former Instructions in conjuring Spirits, How to con- 
we must proceed to consult with the Familiars or Genii; mil^rs or Ge- 
first, after the manner prescribed by Magicians, the Exorcist ""■ 
must inform himself of the name of his good Genius, which he may 
find in the Rules of Travius and Philer7mis; as also, what Character 
and Pentacle, or Lamin, belongs to every Genius. After this is done, 
Let him compose an earnest Prayer unto the said Genius, which he 
mustrepeat thrice every morning for seven dayes before the Invocation. 
The Magician must also perfectly be informed to what Hierarchy 
or Order the Genius belongs, and how he is dignified in respect of 
his Superiours and Inferiours ; for this form of Conjuration belongs 
not to the Infernal or Astral Kingdom, but to the Celestial Hierarchy; 
and therefore great gravity and sanctity is herein required, besides 
the due observation of all the other injunctions, until the time 
approach wherein he puts the Conjuration in execution. 
When the day is come wherein the Magician would invocate his 
proper Genius, he must enter into a private closet, having a little 
Table and Silk Carpet, and two Waxen Candles lighted ; as also a 
Chrystal Stone shaped triangularly about the quantity of an Apple, 
which Stone must be fixed upon a frame in the center of the Table : 
And then proceeding with great devotion to Invocation, he must 
thrice repeat the former Prayer, concluding the same with Pater 
Noster, Sr'c. and a Missale de Spiritu Sancto. 
Then he must begin to Consecrate the Candles, Carpet, Table and 
Chrystal ; sprinkling the same with his own blood, and saying, / do 
by the power of the holy Names aglaoit, (iFIot, (Eloi, Sabiiat^on, Sneplfte^ 
raton, Uafl, agian, Jiat, f ciftobaiD, ImmanucI, arr^on arrlftonton, Sattat,

--- PAGE 582 ---
484 
Book XV. 
The Discovery 
The form of 
Consecration. 
The Prayer. 
224 
Signs of the 
ai)pearance 
The Appear- 
ance 
Sfltiai, Jrobascfiaf), &c. satictife arid cofisecrafe these holy tdensils to 
the performance of this holy work, In the Name of the Father, Son, 
and Holy Ghost, Amen. 
Which done, the Exorcist must say this following Prayer with his face 
towards the East, and kneeling with his back to the consecrated Table. 
O thou blessed l^\i3,xint\ my Angel Gtiardian, vouchsafe to descend 
with thy holy Influence and presence into this spotless Chrystal, that 
I may behold thy glory attd enjoy thy society O thou who art higher 
then the fourth Heaven, and know^st the secrets ofj ([planel. Thou that 
ridest upon the wings of the wind, and art mighty and potent in thy 
celestial atzd super-lmiary motion, do thou descetid and be present I 
pray thee, and desire thee, if ever I have merited thy society, or if tny 
actions and i>:tentions be pure and sanctified before thee, bring thy 
external presence hither, and converse with thy submissive Piipil, by 
the tears of Saints and Songs of Angels, In the Name of the Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost, who are one God for ever and ever. 
This Prayer being first repeated towards the East, must be after- 
wards said towards all the four winds thrice. And next the 70. 
Psalm repeated out of a Bible that hath been consecrated in 
like manner as the rest of the utensils ; which ceremonies being 
seriously performed ; the Magician must arise from his knees, and 
sit before the Crystal bare-headed with the consecrated Bible in his 
hand, and the Waxen Candles newly lighted, waiting patiently and 
internally for the coming and appearance of the Genius. 
Now about a quarter of an hour before the Spirit come. There 
will appear great variety of apparitions and sights within the glass ; 
as first a beaten road or tract, and travelers, men and women march- 
ing silently along; next there will Rivers, Wells, Mountains and Seas 
appear : after that a Shepherd upon a pleasant hill feeding a goodly 
flock of Sheep, and the Sun shining brightly at his going down ; and 
lastly, innumerable shews of Birds and Beasts, Monsters and strange 
appearances, noises, glances, and affrightments, which shews will all 
at last vanish at the appearance of the Genius. 
And then the Genius will present it self amidst the Crystal, in the very 
same apparel and similitude that the person himself is in, giving in- 
structions unto the Exorcist how to lead his life and rectifie his doings. 
But especially (which is the proper work of every Genius) he 
will touch his heart and open his senses and understanding, so 
that by this means, he may attain to the knowledge of every Art and 
Science, which before the opening of his Intellect was lockt and kept 
secret from him. 
After which, the Genius will be familiar in the Stone at the Prayer 
of the Magician.

--- PAGE 583 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. VIII. 
Chap. VIII. 
The nature of 
Hurittan. 
A form of Conjuring HuriJian ihe Familiar, otherwise called 
L?arillan is a Familiar Domestick Spirit of the North, who is 
now become servant to ISalftin, Lord and King of the Northern 
Mountains, he calls himself the Astral Genius of Pomojtia, an 
Island amongst the Orcades beyond Scotland. But he is not 
particularly resident there ; for in the dayes of Solomon and 
David, he was in ferusalem, or Salem, being then under the 
name of iSelilafi ; after that he came over with fulius Ccesar, and 
remained some hundred of years in Cambria, or Wales, instructing 
their Prophetical Poets in British Rhimes, being then surnamed 
Urthin-Wadd Elgin, from thence he betook himself unto this 
Island, Anno 1500. and continued there for 50 years, after which 
he resigned his Dominion to Balkin, and hath continued ever since 
an attendant unto this Prince. 
He is a Spirit of the Air in the order of (iSSlaiiron, and is said to His Office 
procreate as mortals do; He is often sent by his Master upon errands 
to Lapland, Fitiland, and Strik-finia ; as also to the most Northern 
parts of Russia, bordering on the Northern frozen Ocean : His office 
(being called by Magicians) is to demolish strong holds of Enemies, 
destroying every night what they build the day before ; to extinguish 
fires, and make their Gunshot that it hath no power to be enkindled ; 
for his nature is to be at enmity with fire.' and under his Master with 
many Legions he wageth continual warrs with the fiery Spirits that 
inhabit the Mountain Hecla in Ise-land, where they endeavour to 
extinguish these fiery flames, and the inhabiting Spirits defend the 
flames from his Master and his Legions./ 
In this contest they do often totally extirpate and destroy one 
another, killing and crushing when they meet in mighty and violent 
Troops in the Air upon the Sea ; and at such a time many of the 
fiery Spirits are destroyed, when the Enemy hath brought them off 
the Mountain to fight upon the water ; on the contrary, when the 
battle is on the Mountain it self, the Spirits of the Air are often 
worsted, and then great mournings and doleful noises are heard both 
in Iseland and Russia, and Norway for many days after. 
But to proceed to the form of conjuring this aforesaid Spirit, the The form of 
Magician must draw a Circle in a Moonshine night in some solitary cer^^on^es"'^ 
Valley; the Circle must be 18 foot over, and another Circle a foot 
distance within the same, being both drawn with chalk, and the 
235. 
The Warrs of 
Spirits.

--- PAGE 584 ---
486 
Book XV. The Discovevy 
The Consecra- 
tion of the 
Mountain. 
[« ? Kattron] 
[t Immanuel] 
The Conjura- 
tion. 
Exorcist being girded about with two Snakes skins tyed together, 
and having many Snakes skins tyed to his cap, and hanging down 
before and behinde, must also with Chalk draw the form of a fiery 
Mountain at one side of the Circle on this manner ; 
And round about the Mountain these following names must be wrote, 
dlauron, ©potofe, iSalttin, ©potoft, ©rfftm, ©potott, S-toaftnar, jJalaift, 
©poto6, ►f" Hh- After the Mountain is drawn, he must consecrate 
the same in these following words, ©froii, anep^eratoti, Joaron ISara- 
tfiron, il.a^ ftalge tour Jecia, hi the Name of the Father, Son and Holy 
Ghost, Amen. After the Magician hath consecrated the Moun- 
tain, he must write betwixt the circles these following words ; jart^in 
►fi iilalc 5ii 4* ISiilJal iSatttron* ^ aigla ^ Olaura >^< iSasSemo ^ 
i3^otoat ffi lofiim Immannelf ^ Amen. A A A ►t'. Which 
done, he must begin to Invocate the Spirit on this following manner. 
O ye Powers of the East, atl&anaton ; of the West, ©rgon ; of the 
South, ISoralim ; of the North, Olauton ; / charge and command you 
by the dreadful Natnes here ?nentioned, and the Consecration of this 
terrible Mountain, to present your selves one of every sort before this 
Circle by the power f?/' Immanuel, and his holy Name. After this hath 
with fervency been thrice repeated, the Exorcist will hear great noises 
of Swords and fighting, Horses neighing, and Trumpets sounding,

--- PAGE 585 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. IX. 487 
and at last there will appear four little Dwarfs or Pigmies naked TheAppadti- 
before the Circle, their speech will be antient Irish ; which afterwards 
being confined to a Triangle, they will interpret ; the substance 
thereof will be from whence they came last, and what wonderful 
things they can do ; Then the Magician must ask them, if they know 
one ILurt^tan a familiar ; they will answer/ J^amaf) nt truIlo'D iSalfein, 226. 
he is Secretary or servant unto ISalftilt, and after the Exorcist hath Uuvilian. 
charged them to bring the said Hurittan unto him, they will imme- 
diately bring him like a little Dwarf with a crooked nose, and present 
him before the Magician in the triangle ; then the Magician shall 
bind and tye him with the bond of obligation, and with his own blood, 
without any contract of conditions to be performed, that he will 
attend him constantly at his thrice repeating iLuri&an, Huritran, 
iLurt&an, And be ever ready to go whether he will, to the Turks, or to 
the uttermost parts of the Earth, which he can do in an hour, and 
destroy all their Magazines. 
After the Magician hath so bound him, he shall receive from the The Compact. 
Spirit a scrole written in this manner ; 
which is the Indenture to serve him for a year and a day ; and then 
the Magician shall dismiss him for that time in the form of dismis- 
sion. 
Chap. IX. 
Hoiiti to Conjure the Spirit ISalfein the Master of lLw\\bm. 
AS in the former Chapter, the Exorcist is instructed to draw 
the form of the Mountain Hecla within the circle, so in this 
form of Conjuration he must do the same, adding these 
names to be written round the Mountain Mathiel \ Ka^uniel, The names of 
Serap^tel, fttjjjniel Kagel, .-frracirl. These are the names of Olyiftpick Angeis!°'' 
Angels, governing the North, and ruling over every airy Spirit that 
belongs unto the Northern Climate ; so that the authority of these 
names must be used in the calling up of this Spirit, because he is a 
great Lord, and very lofty, neither will he appear without strong and 
powerful Invocations. 
Therefore the Magician must make upon Virgin Parchment the two 
Seals of the Earth, and provide unto himself a Girdle made of a

--- PAGE 586 ---
488 Book XV. Tlie Discovcry 
Bears skin with a rough side next his body, and these names wrote 
round about in the outerside, 1^ SSIpfia 4* ifforonfon, ^a]^, Cantaift, 
ajioiinD ^ Soticas ►{< HJamael ►J* aingeli fortes pur pur ►!< CPItbra, 
<(PIo^im ^ ©mega per flammain tgnts per bitatii Coronjon ►{« Amen. 
►p. Also he must provide a black Priestly Robe to reach to his 
ankles, and a new Sword with ^gla on the one side, and ©n upon the 
other ; having likewise been very continent and chast for three days 
before the execution of his design : and when the appointed night 
approacheth, he must take with him an earthen pan with fire 
therein, and a little Viol with some of his own blood, as also some of 
the Gum or Rozin that comes from the Firr-tree. 
And coming to the appointed place in some solitary Valley, the 
circle must be drawn with chalk, as the former, one circle within 
another, and these powerful names in the circumference, ©tf)eos on 
ilant^on ISrescfitt, ittjasfiamaim, 21iBafiaretf fflSHatjagafi ►fi Co^u *^ ba 
13of)u ^ >I< ►!< ^ magnuB tu ten ffilofjim qui super alas bentorum 
equitaris 
This Circumscription is accounted amongst Magicians of all the 
most powerful and prevalent. 
After this the Circle, Mountain, Fire, Turpentine, Girdle, Garments, 
Sword and Blood must be consecrated according to the foregoing 
forms of Consecration, adding also this to the end of the consecra- 
tion. 
Mighty art thou O aiionay, <!PIof)jm, ga, ^a, aie, Ste, artittog, who 
hast created the light of the day, and the darkness of the night, unto 
whom every knee bows in Heaven and on Earth, who hast created the 
{Cof)u and the ISoJu, that is stupor or numbness in a thing to be 
227. admired, and mighty are thy magnificient An\gels JBamael and (Bluael, 
whose influence can make the winds to bow, and every airy Spirit 
stoop ; Let thy right hand sanctife these consecrated utensils, exter- 
minating every noxious thing from their bodies, and the circum- 
fere7tce of this Circle. Amen. Calenia, sfialom, Sfialom, Slgla on 
^assur, Cafrac, sangeli fortes. In Nomine Pairis, Filii, &^ Spiritus 
Sancti. Amen, Amen, Amen. After that, he shall sweep the circle 
gently with a Foxes tayl, and sprinkle the same round with his blood, 
dipping also the Sword, or anointing it with the same, and brandish- 
ing the same in his right hand, he shall begin to conjure the Spirit on 
this following manner : 
I Exorcize and Conjure thee thou great and powerful 33al&in, Lord 
f/(SrIauron, Lord (?/"3LuriIian, and of fifteen hundred Legions, Lord of 
the Northern Mountaitts, and of every Beast that dwells thereon by 
[* Athanatos]- the lioly and wonderful Natnes of the Almighty Jefjoba^, satfiattato* *i> 
aionoB *b Homtnus scmpiternus *i> aieti&ctos ►t' Sa&ag *i' Jefjobal^,

--- PAGE 587 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. ix. 489 
3Kflirsf», (JFl gator 4< 13cu9 fortiasintus atnapfifralon, antorulc, 
iamrion Pantfioii ^ Craton iWuriUon ^ iJaft, Jle^oba^, 
<[Flof)im pfiitasseron ►{< trinus ct uniis A / Exorcize ajid 
Conjure, I Invocate and Command thee thou aforesaid Spirit, by the 
powers of Angels and Archangels, Cherubim and Seraphim, by the 
tnighty Prince ffioroitfon, by the blood of t^€i, by the righteousness of 
Seth, and the Prayers tj/Noah, by the voyces of Thunder and dreadful 
day of Judgment ; by all these powerful and royal words abovesaidi 
that without delay or nialitious intent, thou do come before me here at 
the circumference of this consecrated Circle, to answer my proposals 
and desires without any manner of terrible form either of thy self, or 
attendants ; but only obediently, fairly, and with good intent, to present 
thy self before me, this Circle being my defence, through his power who 
is Almighty, and hath sanctified the same, hi the Name of the Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen. 
After the Magician hath thrice repeated this Conjuration, Let him 
immediately set the fire before him, and put the Rozin thereon to 
fumigate at the appearance of the conjured Spirits, and at the instant 
of their appearance he shaU hold the Censer of fire in his left hand, 
and the Sword in his right, still turning round as the Spirits do. 
For in a little space after the Invocation is repeated, he shall hear 
the noise of Thunders, and perceive before him in the Valley a mighty 
storm of Lightning and Rain ; after a while the same will cease, and 
an innumerable company of Dwarfs or Pigmies will appear mounted 
upon Chamelions to march towards the Circle surrounding the same. 
Next comes ISalfeilt with his Attendants ; he will appear like the 
god Bacchus upon a little Goat, and the rest that follow will march 
after him afoot. 
Assoon as they come near the Circle, they will breath out of their 
mouths a mist, or fog, which will even obscure the light of the Moon, 
and darken the Magician, that he cannot behold them nor himself ; 
yet let him not be discomfited, or afraid, for that fog will be quickly 
over ; and the Spirits will run round the Circle after iSalftin their 
Lord, who rides upon a Goat ; they will continue to surround the 
Circle, till the Magician begin the form of obligation or binding their 
Leader or King in this form, with the Sword in his right hand, the 
Fire and Rozin burning before him. 
/ conjure and bind thee Balftitl, who art appeared before me, by the 
Father, by the Son, and by the Holy Ghost, by all the holy Consecra- 
tions I have made, by the powerful Names of Heaven, and of Earth, 
and of Hell, that I have ttsed and uttered in calling tipon thee, by the 
Seals which thou here beholdest,and the Sword which I present* unto [»show, not 
thee, by this sanctified Girdle, and all the sanctified and potent things

--- PAGE 588 ---
490 Root; XV, TJic Discovei'y I
aforesaid, That here thou remain peaceably, ajid of thy presetit shape 1
b efore the Northern quarter of this Circle, without injury to me iti j
body, soul, or fortune ; but 07i the contrary, to answer faithfidly unto j
my demands, and not hence to remove, till I have licenced thee to j
depart, In the Name of the Father, Son, and holy Spirit. Amen.\ j
228. When he is thus obliged, he will alight from his Goat, and cause . |
his Attendants to remove further into the Valley, then will he stand j
peaceably before the Circle to answer the Magician. i
After this the Magician shall begin to demand into his own posses- 
sion a Familiar to build or pull down any Castle or strong hold in a ■
night ; and that this Familiar bring with him the Girdle of Conquest, 
or Victory, that the Magician being girded with the same may over- 
come all enemies whatsoever, !
And further, the Spirit is able to inform him of all questions 
concerning Thunder and Lightning, the Motions of the Heavens, the i
Comets and Apparitions in the air. Pestilence and Famine, noxious j
and malevolent blasts, as also of the Inhabitants of the Northern Pole, i
and the wonders undiscovered throughout the world. 
Likewise if the Exorcist inquire concerning the habitations of starry 
Spirits, he will readily answer him, describing their orders, food, life, 
and pasttime truly and exactly. !
After the Magician hath satisfied himself with inquiries, and curious j
questions unto the Spirit, there will come from amongst the company a j
little Spirit of a span long, like a little Eihiop, which the great King i
ISalfein will deliver unto the Exorcist to continue as a Familiar with |
him as long as his life shall last. This familiar the possessor may '
[•as] name at* it pleaseth him. '
The three last, who had this Spirit into possession, were three j
Northern Magicians, the first Honduras a Norwegian, who called it j
^Ifjilrnar, and commanded it at his pleasure with a little Bell. j
After him Benno his eldest Son injoy'd the same under the same j
name. 
And Swarkzar a Poloniaji Priest was the last who enjoy'd it under 
the Name of iHiincuIa ; all which names were imposed upon it, 
according to the pleasure of the Masters ; and therefore the naming 
of this familiar is left to tlie discretion of the Exorcist. 
Now when the Master hath taken this familiar into his custody and 
service, the Spirit JSalfeili will desire to depart, being wearied if the j
action continue longer then an hour. Therefore the Magician must [
be careful to dismiss him in this following form : i 
Because thou hast diligently ansiuered my demands, and been ready 
to come at my first call, I do here licence thee to depart unto thy proper ■ 
place, without injtiry or danger to man or Beast ; depart, I say, and [

--- PAGE 589 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. ix 
be ever ready at my call, being duly exorcized and conjured by sacred 
Rites of Magick ; / charge thee to withdraw with quiet and peace ; 
and peace be continued betwixt me and thee, In the Name of the Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen. 
Then the Spirits company will begin to march about their Prince, 
and in a formal Troop will march along the Valley, whilest the Magi- 
cian repeateth Pater Noster,&^c. until the Spirits be quite out of sight 
and vanished. 
This is a compleat form of conjuring the aforesaid Spirit, according 
to the Rules of Vaganoslus the Norwegian.

--- PAGE 590 ---
492 
A Discourse concerning 
[Appendix II.] 
[This second Book of " A Discourse concerning Devils and Spirits", like the Chapters in 
Appendix I, were added to the third edition, 1665, by some one unknown.] 
39. 
BOOK II. 
Chap. I. 
The reason of 
this Addition. 
The nature of 
Spirits. 
Of Spirits itt General ; What they are and how to be consi- 
dered: Also how farr the Power of Magitians and Witches 
is able to operate in Diabolical Magick. 
|Ecause the Author in his foregoing Treatise, upon the 
Nature of Spirits and Devils, hath only touched the sub- 
ject thereof superficially, omitting the more material part ; 
and with a brief and cursory Tractat, hath concluded to 
speak the least of this subject which indeed requires most amply to 
be illustrated ; therefore I thought fit to adjoyn this subsequent 
discourse; as succedaneous to the fore-going, and conducing to the 
compleating of the whole work. 
2. The Nature of Spirits is variously to be considered, according 
to the source to which each Caterva doth belong : for as some are 
altogether of a divine and celestial nature ; not subject to the abom- 
inable Inchantments and Conjurations of vitious mankind ; so others 
are the grand Instigators, stirring up mans heart to attempt the 
enquiry after the darkest, and most mysterious part of Magick, or 
Witchcraft : neither is this their suggestion without its secret end : 
that is, that by the private insinuation, and as it were incorporating 
themselves into the affection, or desire of the Witch, or Magician ; 
they may totally convert him into their own nature : reducing him at 
last by constant practice, to such obdurateness and hardness of heart, 
that he becometh one with them, and delighted with their association, 
being altogether dead to any motions in himself that may be called 
good. 
3. And if we may credit example, which is the surest proof ; the 
1

