--- PAGE 3 ---
Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2015 
https://archive.org/details/b21720307

--- PAGE 4 ---
I
!
I

--- PAGE 5 ---
THE 
DISCOVERIE OF WITCHCRAFT

--- PAGE 6 ---
i 
1I
I 
I
i
1

--- PAGE 7 ---
THE DISCOVERIE 
OF 
TCHCRAFT 
S /5 
REGINALD SCOT, Esquire 
BEING A REPRINT OF THE FIRST EDITION 
PUBLISHED IN 1584 
WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES, GLOSSARY, AND INTRODUCTION 
BY 
BRINSLEY NICHOLSON, M.D. 
DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL

--- PAGE 8 ---
I

--- PAGE 9 ---
W I 
THE DISCOVERIE 
OF 
TCHCRAFT 
REGINALD SCOT, Esquire 
BEING A REPRINT OF THE FIRST EDITION 
PUBLISHED IN 1584 
([Fbttclr 
WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES, GLOSSARY, AND INTRODUCTION 
BY 
BRINSLEY NICHOLSON, M.D. 
DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL 
LONDON 
ELLIOT STOCK, 62 PATERNOSTER ROW, E.G. 
1886

--- PAGE 10 ---
This ediiion of Scot's Discoverie consists 
of 2^0 copies only.-^ E. S.

--- PAGE 11 ---
DR. NICHOLSON'S SUBSCRIBERS. 
The Royal Library, Windsor Castle. 
W. Aldis Wright, LL.D., Cambridge. 
Fabyan Amery, Esq., Ashburton. 
J. E. Bailey, Esq., Stratford, Manchester. 
W. W. Baynes, Esq., London. 
Ernest Blacker, Esq., Midsomer Norton. 
D. Brodie, Esq., Canterbury. 
A. H. Bullen, Esq., West Hampstead. 
Miss Bursill, London. 
J. Patterson Cassells, M.D., Glasgow. 
Prof. Chrystal, Edinburgh. 
Sir Andrew Clark, Bart., M.D., LL.D., etc., London. 
The Lord Chief Justice Coleridge, London. 
C. W. Shirley Deakin, Esq., Allahabad. 
K. Deighton, Esq., Agra. 
Edw. Denham, Esq., New Bedford, U.S.A. 
The Right Hon. the Earl of Derby, Knowsley HalL 
The Duke of Devonshire, Devonshire House. 
R. Dill, M.D., Brighton. 
Dr. J. Matthews Duncan, A.M., F.R.S., etc., London. 
Mrs. D. P. Evans, Clifton, Bristol. 
P. F. Sparke Evans, Esq., Clifton, Bristol. 
Prof. John Ferguson, Glasgow. 
Alex. Forsyth, M.D., Greenwich.

--- PAGE 12 ---
2 
Francis F. Fox, J. P., Chipping Sodbury, Bristol. 
Prof. T. R. Fraser, M.D., Edinburgh. 
H. H. FURNESS, Esq., Philadelphia, U.S.A. 
James Gairdner, Esq., London. 
Prof. W. T. Gairdner, M.D., LL.D., Glasgow. 
EDM. GOLDSMID, F.S.A. (Scot.), Edinburgh. 
The Rev. A. B. Grosart, D.D., LL.D., Blackburn. 
C. O. Halliwell-Phillipps, Esq.,F.R.S., etc., Brighton. 
Henry Hucks Gibbs, Esq., London. 
The Rev. W. A. Harrison, South Lambeth. 
W. A. Hammond, Esq., New York. 
C. M. INGLEBY, Esq., LL.D., Essex. 
Sir Wm. Jenner, Bart, M.D., F.R.S., etc., London. 
W. Oscar Jennings, M.D., Paris. 
Dav. a. King, M.B., London. 
F. de M. Leathes, Esq., London. 
Library, British Museum. 
 Exeter College, Oxford. 
 Harvard Coll., Cambridge, U.S.A. 
 Royal Institution, London. 
 Leeds. 
 McGill University, Montreal. 
 National, of Ireland. 
 Society of Antiquaries, Scotland. 
 St. Andrew's University, Aberdeen. 
 Free, Sydney. 
Louis Leisler, Esq., Frankfort-on-the-Main. 
The Marquis of Lothian, Newbattle Abbey. 
Dove MacColman, M.D., Argyleshire. 
Prof. Douglas Maclagan, M.D., Edinburgh. 
J. D. Marwick, Esq., LL.D., Glasgow. 
Prof. David Masson, Edinburgh. 
John Morison, Esq., Glasgow. 
Prof. H. Morley, LL.D., London.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Sir JAS. Paget, Bart, F.R.S., LL.D., etc., London. 
Cornelius Payne, Esq., Kemp Town, Brighton. 
Miss E. Phipson, London. 
The Earl of Powis, Berkeley Square. 
The Right Hon. the Earl of RoSEBERY,Dah-neney Castle. 
Jos. Carne Ross, M.D., Penzance. 
The Rev. E. E. Baylee Salisbury, B.D., Horncastle. 
Alex. Stewart, M.D., Pendleton, Manchester. 
W. G. Stone, Esq., Walditch, Bridport. 
Lawson Tait, F.R.C.S., Birmingham. 
Samuel Timmins, Esq., F.S.A., Arley, Coventry. 
D. Hack Tuke, M.D., LL.D., London. 
G. H. White, Esq., Torquay. 
Walter G. Whittingham, Esq., London. 
W. Wilson, Esq., Berwick-on-Tweed. 
A. J. Young, Esq., Edinburgh.

--- PAGE 15 ---
DEDICATION. 
Co tfie jMemovo 
OF 
H.R.H. PRINCE LEOPOLD, DUKE OF ALBANY', 
UNTIMELY TAKEN FROM US, 
THIS WORK OF AN ELIZABETHAN ENGLISHMAN, 
AND OF A KINDRED SPIRIT, 
WHOSE HONESTY, INTELLIGENCE, AND COMPASSION 
FOUGHT AGAINST THE CRUEL SUPERSTITION 
AND IGNORANCE OF HIS AGF,, 
IS, 
BY ROYAL PERMISSION AND WITH REGRETFUL ESTEEM, 
DEDICATED BY 
THE EDITOR.

--- PAGE 17 ---
PREFACE. 
A 
HIS reprint is not a facsimile of the edition of 1584, for that was 
■ in black letter, and its page smaller and of quarto size. Being 
also for modern readers, and for use, the / of the original has become, 
where necessary, the / of the second edition ; the u and v have been 
altered according to modern usage, that is, generally interchanged ; 
while the short s replaces the f. Such modernisations render it more 
readable by the historical and philosophical student, by the man of 
science, and by the psychological physician, willing to learn all that 
may instruct himself and benefit others. Neither would this reprint 
have been undertaken, unless the work itself had appeared to my 
friend and fellow-student, W. T. Gairdner, M.D., LL.D., Professor 
of Medicine in the University of Glagow, — and led by him — to myself 
and others, worthy on the above-mentioned grounds, of being repro- 
duced, and as being both in matter and style a valuable English 
classic. 
While, however, it is not a facsimile, yet, excepting such variations 
as are above noticed, and allowing for the few and trifling errors from 
which no copy can expect to be free, not even a photographic one, as 
experts in these matters well know, this will, I believe, be found a 
correct reprint. Every proof has been thrice, and sometimes oftener, 
read over with the original by myself, and these efforts have been 
well supplemented by the intelligence and care of its printers. 
Even the word-errors of the original, where not in its list of 
errata, have been retained, though the true or conjectural readings 
have been given in the margin, or in two or three instances in 
the Notings at the end. Except also in two instances, where 
for necessity's sake alterations have been introduced within []s, 
and the original given in the margin, the old punctuation has been 
retained, it being, as a rule, very good, while any slight slips are

--- PAGE 18 ---
viii 
Preface. 
readily observed, and do not affect the sense. For such other differ- 
ences as are due to the black letter, and for others like these, I would 
refer the print-studying reader to the Introduction. 
In the biographical portion of this Introduction, besides a supposi- 
tion or two of my own, which from his writings seem to me highly 
probable, there have been given notices of his pedigree, age, and 
marriages, matters hitherto unknown or misstated, and for which I 
would at once record my indebtedness to Edmund Ward Oliver, Esq. 
This gentleman having taken an interest in investigating these ques- 
tions, and being a perfect stranger to me, wrote and offered the results 
of his inquiries so soon as he had learnt that I was engaged with this 
reprint, and has since most obligingly answered the various questions 
that I have had occasion to put to him. A copy of Scot's Will has 
been also for the first time published, and some Notes and a Glossary 
added. Were I to have imitated the learned editors of former days, 
I should have added, not some, but exhaustive notes on every point, 
gathered from every known and unknown source ; but I have con- 
fined myself to explanation, or to making a few remarks on the 
text, giving also the author's agreement with, or obligations to Wier, 
so far as I knew them, and Shakespeare's and Middleton's obligations 
to himself ; my reason for not entering into greater details being 
that I am no student of the pseudo-science of witchcraft, but a student 
only of what is useful, and true, and good. 
It would be unseemly, especially after mentioning Mr. Olivers 
name, were I to close this without acknowledging the kind assistance 
of my well-known friend, James Gairdner, Esq., of the Public Record 
Office ; of* my Shakespearian friends, W. Aldis Wright, LL.D., and 
P. A. Daniel, Esq. ; of that given me by the Very Reverend Father 
W. H. Eyre, lately Superior of Stonyhurst; by Mrs. Amelia Green; as 
also by Prof W. W. Skeat, and Dr. J. A. H. Murray, in my Glossary; 
though all were, and personally are, strangers; as are Miss Kath. P. 
Woolrych, Oare Vicarage, Kent, and Miss Ayscough, of Brabourne 
Vicarage ; and especially that given me by my other Shakespearian 
friends, the Rev. W. H. Harrison, of St. Anne's, South Lambeth, and 
W. G. Stone, Esq. My best thanks are also due to Mr. J. J. Jervis 
for the use, for the printer, of a partially incomplete copy of the first

--- PAGE 19 ---
Preface. 
ix 
edition ; to the University of Glasgow for the loan, for my own use, 
for the greater part of a year, of another copy of this first edition ; 
and for the use for the same period of a copy of the third edition 
to my Alma Mater of Edinburgh, endeared to me by the teachings, 
remembrances, and kindnesses of Sir William Hamilton, Allan 
Thomson, Christison, Traill, Jamieson, that most sagacious of 
surgeons and teachers, Syme, and the ever-to-be-revered physician 
and man, W. Pulteney Alison. 
Br. Nicholson. 
ERRATA. 
The pagings, as usual, are those of the first edition. 
P. 20, heading, ch. ii, "inquistors'\ read "inquisitors". 
P. 92, 1. 5, 6, "Ulyffes" {bis), read "Ulysses". 
P. 169, 1. 9, "obsevation", read "observation". 
P. 192, 1. 3. "«(riai/", read "wTtav". 
P. 334, 1. 2, from end, "three," read "three ;" 
P. 347, 1. 6, from end, " left it", read " left in". 
P. 522, 1. 6, from end, ''Silyllce'\ read ''Sibylla". 
hb

--- PAGE 20 ---
INTRODUCTION. 
EXCEPT that they add the names of some who have opposed his 
views, or some such trifling matters, all the writers of biographi- 
cal notices of Scot have drawn their information from the account 
given of him in Wood's Athena Oxon. Nor, indeed, until lately, un- 
less original search had been made, were other sources available. 
Hence I, in the first place, give his words verbatim from the edition 
of 1691. 
" ReynoLDE Scot, a younger Son of Sir John Scot of Scots-hall, 
near to Smeeth in Kent, by his Wife, Daughter of Reynolde Pimp of 
Pimps-court Knight, was born in that County, and at about 17 years 
of age was sent to Oxon, particularly, as it seems, to Hart hall, where 
several of his Country-men and name studied in the latter end of K. 
Hen. 8. and in the Reign of Ed. 6. &^c. Afterwards he retired to his 
native Country without the honour of a degree, and settled at Smeeth, 
where he found great incouragement in his studies from his kinsman 
Sir Thos. Scot. About which time taking to him a Wife, he gave 
himself up solely to solid reading, to the perusing of obscure authors 
that had by the generality of Scholars been neglected, and at times 
of leisure to husbandry and gardening, as it may partly appear from 
these books following. 
"A perfect platform of a Hop-garden, and necessary instructions for 
the making and maintenance thereof, with notes and rules for refor- 
mation of all abuses, &c. Land. 1576. qu. the 2. edit, as it seems. 
"The discovery of Witchcraft; wherein the leud dealing of Witches, 
and Witchmongers is notably detected, the knavery of Conjurers, 
the impiety of Inchantors, the folly of Southsayers, &c. With many 
other things are opened, which have long been hidden, howbeit very 
necessary to be known. Land. 1584. qu. in 16 books. 
"Discourse upon Devils and Spirits. — In this, and the former, both 
printed together, it plainly appears that the author was very well 
versed in many choice books, and that his search into them was so 
profound, that nothing slip'd his Pen that might make for his purpose. 
Further also in the said Discovery and Discourse, though he holds 
that Witches are not such that were in his time and before, commonly 
executed for Witches ; or that Witches were, or are not ; yet they, 
which were written for the instruction of all Judges and Justices of 
that age, (being the first of that nature that were published in the 
Mother tongue,) did for a time make great impressions in the Magis-

--- PAGE 21 ---
Introduction. 
xt 
tracy and Clergy, tho afterwards condemned by James King of 
Scots (the same who succeeded Qu. Elizabeth in the Monarchy of 
England) in his Preface to DcEmo7iology^ printed under his Name at 
Edinburgh in 1597. qu. and by several others since, among whom 
was Rich. Bernard of Batcomb, in his Epist. Ded. before his 
Cicide to Grand Jury-tnen, &c. Lond. 1627. in oct. What else our 
author Scot hath written, I cannot yet tell, nor anything else of him, 
only but that he dyed in Sept. or Oct. in fifteen hundred ninety and 
nine, and was buried among his Ancestors in the Church at Snieeth 
before-mentioned. 
" In the time of the said Reynold Scot and before, have been con- 
versant among the Muses in Hart hall, the Sackviles of Sussex; the 
Colepepers of Kent and Stcssex, the Sedlies of Kent., and the Scots 
before mentioned, with others of inferiour note of the said Counties." 
Notes added in Bliss's Reprint. 
" 7. The learned author in his Discovery is as vehement against 
Popery as against witchcraft, and quite indecent in his abuse of the 
saints of the Romish church." — COLE. [His indecency being for the 
most part a narrative of, and obvious reflections on, their indecency. 
And this I say understanding the sense in which he uses the word.] 
" 8. See a full account of this curious book, as Mr. Oldys calls it, in 
his British Librarian, p. 213. All the copies of the first edit. 1584, 
that could be found were burnt by order of K. James I. an author on 
the other side of the question." — Vid. Hist. Dictionary, sub voce " Scot". 
["Reginaldus Scotus, Anglus, tractatnm de Incantarnentis scrip- 
sit, in quo plerasque traditiones de Magia Melancholise, & morbis 
variis, aut artibus histrionicis adscribit."] " Hunc in Anglia publica 
auctoritate combustum, sibi autem nunquam fuisse visum refert 
Thomasius de crimine magias § 3." — Vide [j. v.] Vogt., Cat. Libr. rar., 
P- 617 [1713]- 
" Liber in folio scriptus Anglica lingua a Reginaldo Scoto in quo 
plurima occurrunt contra magiae existentiam argumenta. Est ille 
etiam in Belgicam linguam conversus : sed plenior editio est ultima 
Anglica." — Moi-hof.., ii, 459. 
[Then a short note on the three editions.] 
In 1874 there were privately printed, Memorials of the Scot Family., 
by Jas. Renat Scott, Esq., and from them I extract the following tables : 
Rich. Scott=f=Mary Whetenhall. 
Reginald Richard ancestor of the Edward=j=May, d. of [2 d.] 
author. Scotts of Shrewsbury 1 JohnWar- 
and elsewhere. ren. 
A quo the Scotts of Glemsford Suffolk and afterwards of 
Ohio and Massachusetts in America.

--- PAGE 22 ---
Introduction. 
Reg. Scott, b. 1 541, — Alice Cobbe, d. of Th. Cobbe of Cobbes 
But as the first part of the ancestry given in this book is not sup- 
ported by anything beyond possibility and legend, so this latter 
portion is incorrect in various particulars. Instead, however, of 
taking each inaccuracy item by item, it will be simpler to give a 
consecutive account of such facts as to his ancestry, and as to 
Reginald Scott himself, as can be proved by documentary evidence 
or rendered probable by deductions therefrom. 
John Philipot, Rouge Dragon and Somerset Herald, who died in 
1645, set forth the pleasant and picturesque, but slightly supported 
origin of the family. I say pleasant, because the Scotts in the times 
of Elizabeth, James, and Charles, were a family of large possessions, 
wealth, and influence, influence so great that it is said that Elizabeth 
refused the request made by Lord Buckhurst, or the Earl of Leicester, 
that Sir Thomas Scott should be ennobled, saying that he had already 
more influence in Kent than she had. She seems also to have had from 
this, or from some other reason, a personal dislike to them, for in her 
Progress in 1573, she having passed three days at his father-in-law's. 
Sir John Baker, of Sissinghurst Castle, declined to visit Scotts-hall, 
saying she wished to proceed to her own house, though on her way 
thither she had to pass Sir Thomas's gates. In his Villare Catiti- 
anum, p. 313, Philipot has these words : '''' Scotts-hall, which is now 
and hath been for divers Descents the Inheritance of eminent Gentle- 
men of that Sirname, whom I dare aver upon probable Grounds 
were originally called Balioll. William Balioll, second brother to 
Alexander de Balioll, frequently writ his Name William de Balioll 
le Scot, and it is probable, that upon the Tragedy of John, Earl of 
Atholl, who was made prisoner Edward the first, and barbarously 
executed, in the year 1307. (whilst he endeavoured more nobly than 
successfully to defend the gasping Liberty of Scotland against the 
Eruption of that Prince ;) this Family to decline the Fury of that 
Monarch, who was a man of violent passions, altered the name of 
mar. 1 1 Oct. 1568, 
died Oct. 1599. 
Place, Aldington, Kent. 
Co]lyar=Marie. 
Elizabeth=Sackville Tumor of Tablehurst, 
Sussex.

--- PAGE 23 ---
Introduction. 
xiii 
Balioll to that of their Extraction and Country, and assumed for the 
future the Name of Scot. That the Sirname of this Family was 
originally Balioll, I" farther upon these Reasons assert. First, the 
ancient Arms of Balioll Colledge in Oxford, which was founded by 
John Balioll, and dedicated to St. Katharine was a Katherin-Wheele, 
being still part of the paternal Coat of this Family. Secondly, David 
de Strabogie, who was Son and Heir to the unfortunate Earl above- 
said, astonished with an Example of so much Terror, altered his naine 
from Balioll to Strabogie, which was a Signory which accrued to him 
the Right of his Wife, wlio was Daughter and Heir to John Comin, Earl 
of Badzenoth and Strabogie, and by this Name King Edward the 
second, omitting that of Balioll restored ChilJiam-castle to him for 
Life, in the fifteenth year of his reign. Thirdly, the Earls of Btecclengh, 
and the Barons of Burley in Scotland, who derive themselves origin- 
ally from Balioll, are known at this instant by no other Sirname, but 
Scot, and bear with some inconsiderable Difference, those very Arms 
which are at present the paternal Coat of the Family of Scots-hall." 
This tradition excluded, we find that Sir William Scot of Braberne, 
now Brabourne, in Kent, is the first of whom we have historical 
mention. He was knighted in T336, when the Black Prince was 
created Duke of Cornwall, and died in 1350 : a brass to his memory, 
being in Weever's time (1631), the first of the memorials of the Scot 
family in Brabourne church. According to Philipot, this Sir William 
was the same with Sir William Scot, then Chief Justice of England ; 
but if Mr. Foss be right in stating that this latter died in 1346, the 
year of the Black Death, this view cannot be upheld. 
Another Sir William, apparently a grandson of the above, acquired 
through his mother the manor of Combe in Brabourne, and through 
his first wife and her relations — modes of increase in which the 
family seem to have been fortunate — that of Orlestone, as well as 
other places; and in 1420 he built Scotshall, in the manor of Hall in 
Smeeth, and was in 1428 sheriff of the county, and in 1430 knight of 
the shire in parliament. He died 1433. Scotshall, from time to 
time enlarged or rebuilt, and especially so by Sir Edward Scot, in 
the reign of Charles I, became the family seat for twelve generations. 
Evelyn, under date August 2, 1663, records his visit to it (soon after 
the young knight's marriage), and calls it "a right noble seate,

--- PAGE 24 ---
xiv 
Introdtiction. 
uniformely built, with a handsome gallery. It stands in a park well 
stor'd, the land fat and good. We were exceedingly feasted by the 
young knight, and in his pretty chapell heard an excellent sermon by 
his chaplaine." It was sold, with the remaining possessions of the 
family, at the close of the last century, and destroyed in 1808. Some 
undulations in a field on the north side of the road from Ashford to 
Hythe, about half a mile to the east of Smeeth church, alone mark 
its site. 
The son of this second Sir WiUiam, named Sir John, being con- 
nected with the Woodvilles, and therefore with the wife of Edward IV, 
and being a staunch Yorkist, and apparently a man of intelligence, 
was employed in special embassies to Charles, Duke of Burgundy, 
especially in 1467, when he went to treat of the marriage of the king's 
sister with the duke. He had also various other and more substantial 
favours conferred upon him from time to time, from 1461 onwards, 
including that of Chilham Castle for life, as somewhat oddly, and 
I think wrongly, noted in the extract from Philipot. He died in 1485, 
and probably intestate, as no will is recorded. 
To him succeeded his son, the third Sir William in this account, 
and he dying in 1524, was succeeded by his son, a second Sir John. 
This last, by his marriage with Anne, daughter of Reginald Pympe, 
had three sons, and died on the 7th October 1533. The eldest, 
William, followed his father on the sth June 1536, and leaving no 
offspring, his next brother, Sir Reginald, took his place. Of the third 
brother, Richard, the father of our Reginald, I shall speak presently. 
Meanwhile, returning to the main line, I would say that Sir Reginald, 
dying on the i6th October 1554, was succeeded by his son. Sir 
Thomas, the "cousin" to whom Reginald was much indebted, and 
one of the four to whom he dedicated his IVitcJuraft. He was, in 
his day, a man of note, intelligence, and action. Finding his estate 
in debt, he yet kept one hundred at his table, was most hospitable, 
and died owing nothing, though, of course, to provide for the 
younger of his very numerous progeny, various portions of his estate 
were by his will sold after his death. He was deputy-lieutenant of 
his county, sheriff of Kent in 1576, knight of the shire for the 
Parliaments of 13 and 28 Elizabeth, chief of the Kentish forces at 
Northboume Downs, where they were assembled to repel any landing

--- PAGE 25 ---
Introdiution. 
XV 
from the Armada; and it may be added, as showing his promptness, 
readiness, and decision, that 4,000 of these were there, equipped for the 
field, the day after he received his orders from the Privy Council. 
He was one of the Commissioners to report on the advisability of 
improving the breed of horses in this country, and either before or 
after this, is said to have published a book on the subject. He was a 
Commissioner for draining and improving Romney Marsh, and after- 
wards Superintendent of the improvements of Dover harbour. Various 
letters to and from him in reference to Dover harbour, as well as to the 
Kentish forces, are to be found in the State Calendars. Having been 
the parent of seventeen children by his first wife, Emmeline Kempe, a 
relative by maternal descent, he died on the 30th December 1594, and 
Ashford parish offered to pay the expenses of his funeral if only they 
were allowed to bury him in their church. Most of these facts are 
noted in the following verses, which I give, chiefly because there are 
some probabilities that they were by Reginald. A copy of them seems 
to have been found among the family papers, in his handwriting. 
That he made some of the verse translations given in his Witchcraft 
is extremely probable, from the want in these cases of marginal 
references to the translator's name; hence a second probability. The 
verses themselves render it likely that they were one of those 
memorial elegies then affixed tin racfov by affectionate friends and 
relatives, and not what we now call an epitaph ; and the third verse 
clearly shows that they were written at least some little time after Sir 
Thomas's decease, and therefore were not improbably written to be 
affixed to the handsome tomb erected over his remains. Hence a third 
probability ; but beyond the accumulated force of these we cannot go. 
Epitaph on Sir Thomas Scott, as given in the ^''Memorials of the 
Scott Family", a7id also in Picks " Collection of Curious Pieces 
in the World", vol. 3. 
Here lyes Sir Thomas Scott by name ; 
Oh happie Kempe that bore him ! 
Sir Raynold, with four knights of fame, 
Lyv'd lyneally before him. 
His wieves were Baker, Heyman, Beere ; 
His love to them unfayned. 
He lyved nyne and fiftie yeare, 
And seventeen soules he gayned.

