ds. Neverthelesse, all the learned expositors of that place 
affirme, that they made a shew of creation, &c : exhibiting by cunning 
a resemblance of some of those miracles, which GOD wrought by the 
hand of Moses. Yea S. Augustine and manie other hold, that 
they made by art (and that trulie) the serpents, &c./ 
But that they may by art approch somewhat neerer 313- 
to those actions, than hath beene yet declared, 
shall and may appeere by these and 
manie other conclusions, 
if they be 
true.

--- PAGE 354 ---
256 
13- Booke. 
The discoverie 
The xviii. Chapter. 
Naturall 
conclusids. 
To produce 
anie fowle 
out of ail eg, 
without the 
naturall 
helpe of 
the hen. 
» The mo- 
ther of mar- 
vels. 
Two kind 
of todes, 
naturall & 
teraporall. 
How to produce or make monsters by art magike, and why Pharaos 
magicians could not make lice. 
jTRATO, De?nocritus, Empedocles, and of late, Jo. Bap. 
Neap, teach by what meanes monsters may be produced, 
both from beast and also from fowle. Aristotle himselfe 
teacheth to make a chicken have foure legs, and as manie 
wings, onlie by a doubled yolked eg : whereby also a serpent may be 
made to have manie legs. Or any thing that produceth egs, may 
likewise be made double membred, or dismembred : & the viler 
creature the sooner brought to monstrous deformitie, which in more 
221. noble creatures is more hardlie/ brought to passe. There are also 
prettie experiments of an eg, to produce anie fowle, without the 
naturall helpe of the hen : the which is brought to passe, if the eg be 
laid in the powder of the hens doong, dried and mingled with some of 
the hens fethers, & stirred everie fourth houre. You may also pro- 
duce (as they saie) the most venomous, noisome, and dangerous 
serpent, called a cockatrice, by melting a little arsenicke, and the 
poison of serpents, or some other strong venome, and drowning an eg 
therein, which there must remaine certeine daies ; and if the eg be 
set upright, the operation will be the better. This may also be 
doone, if the eg be laid in doong, which of all other things giveth the 
most singular and naturall heate : and as J. Bap. Neap, saith is 
*Mirabilium rerum parens ; who also writeth, that Crines fccmince 
menstruoscE are turned into serpents within short space : and he 
further saith, that basill being beaten, and set out in a moist place, 
betwixt a couple of tiles, dooth ingender scorpions. The ashes of a 
ducke, being putbetweene two dishes, and set in a moist place, dooth 
ingender a huge tode : Quod etiam efficit sanguis menstruoszis. Manie 
writers conclude, that there be two maner of todes, the/ one bred by 
naturall course and order of generation, the other growing of them- 
selves, which are called temporarie, being onlie ingendred of shewers 
and dust : and (as J. Bap. Neap, saith) they are easie to be made. 
Plutarch and Heraclides doo saie, that they have seene these to 
descend in raine, so as they have lien and cralled on the tops of 
houses, &c. Also Aelianus dooth saie, that he sawe frogs and todes, 
whereof the heads & shoulders were alive, & became flesh ; the 
hinder parts being but earth, & so cralled on two feete, the other 
being not yet fashioned or fullie framed. And Macrobius reporteth.

--- PAGE 355 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 19. 
that in Aegypt, mice growe of earth and shewers ; as also frogs, todes, 
and serpents in other places. They saie that Dati7natiis Hispanus 
could make them when & as manie as he listed. He is no good 
angler, that knoweth not how soone the entrales of a beast, when they 
are buried, will engender maggots (which in a civiler terme are called 
gentles) a good bait for small fishes. Whosoever knoweth the order 
of preserving silkewormes, may perceive a like conclusion : bicause 
in the winter, that is a dead seed, which in the summer is a livelie 
creature. Such and greater experiments might be knowne to /annes 
and Jambres, and serve well to their purpose, especiallie with such 
excuses, delaies, and cunning, as they could joine therewithall. But 
to proceed, and come a little neerer to their feats, and to shew you a 
knacke beyond their cunning ; I can assure you that of the fat of a 
man or a woman, lice are in verie short space ingendered : and yet I 
saie, Pharaos magicians could not make them, with all the cunning 
they had. Whereby you may perceive, that God indeed performed 
the other actions, to indurate Pharao, though he thought his magicians 
did with no lesse dexteritie than Moses worke miracles and woonders. 
But some of the interpretors of that place excuse their ignorance in 
that matter, thus ; The divell (saie they) can make no creature under 
the quantitie of a barlie corne, and lice being so little cannot therefore 
be created by them. As though he that can make the greater, could 
not make the lesse. A verie grosse absurditie. And as though 
that he which hath power over great, had not the like over 
small./ / 
M-iggotts 
ingendred 
of the in- 
wards of a 
beast are 
good for 
Giles. Alley . 
See the 
poore mans 
librarie. 
The xix. Chapter. 
3^5- 222. 
That great maifers may be wrought by this art, when princes esteeme 
and mainteine it : of divers woonderfull experiments, and of 
strange conclusions in glasses, of the art perspective, Ss^c. 
O WBEIT, these are but trifles in respect of other experi- 
ments to this effect ; speciallie when great princes 
mainteine & give countenance to students in those 
magicall arts, which in these countries and in this age is 
rather prohibited than allowed, by reason of the abuse commonlie 
coupled therewith ; which in truth is it that mooveth admiration and 
estimation of miraculous workings. As for example. If I affirme, 
that with certeine charmes and popish praiers I can set an horsse or 
an asses head upon a mans shoulders, I shall not be beleeved ; or if 
1 doo it, I shall be thought a witch. And yet if /. Bap. Neap, experi- 
L L

--- PAGE 356 ---
ij. Buolce. 
The discoverie 
Wonder- 
full experi- 
ments. 
To set an 
horsscs or 
an asses 
head on a 
mans neck 
and shoul- 
ders, 
Strange 
things to 
be doone 
by perspec- 
tive glasses. 
ments be true, it is no difficult matter to make it seeme so : and the 
charme of a witch or papist joined with the experiment, will also make 
the woonder seeme to proceed thereof. The words used in such case 
are uncerteine, and to be recited at the pleasure of the witch or cou- 
sener. But the conclusion is this : Cut off the head of a horsse or an 
asse (before they be dead) otherwise the vertue or strength thereof 
will be the lesse effectuall, and make an earthern vessell of fit 
capacitie to conteine the same, and let it be filled with the oile and 
fat therof ; cover it close, and dawbe it over with lome : let it 
boile over a soft fier three dales continuallie, that the flesh boiled 
may run into oile, so as the bare bones may be scene : beate the 
haire into powder, and mingle the same with the oile ; and annoint 
the heads of the standers by, and they shall seeme to have horsses or 
asses heads. If beasts heads be annointed with the like oile made of 
a mans head, they shall seeme to have mens faces, as diverse authors 
soberlie affirme. If a lampe be annointed heerewith, everie thing shall 
seeme most monstrous. It is also written, that if that which is called 
316. Sperma in anie beast be bur/ned, and anie bodies face therewithal! 
annointed, he shall seeme to have the like face as the beast had. 
But if you beate arsenicke verie fine, and boile it with a little sulphur 
in a covered pot, and kindle it with a new candle, the standers by will 
seeme to be hedlesse. Aqua composita and salt being fiered in the 
night, and all other lights extinguished, make the standers by seeme 
as dead. All these things might be verie well perceived and knowne, 
and also practised by Jannes and Jainbres. But the woonderous 
devises, and miraculous sights and conceipts made and conteined in 
glasse, doo farre exceed all other ; whereto the art perspective is verie 
necessarie. For it sheweth the illusions of them, whose experiments 
be scene in diverse sorts of glasses ; as in the hallowe, the plaine, the 
embossed, the columnarie, the pyramidate or piked, the turbinall, 
the bounched, the round, the cornerd, the inversed, the eversed, the 
massie, the regular, the irregular, the coloured and cleare glasses : 
for you may have glasses so made, as what image or favour soever 
you print in your imagination, you shall thinke you see the same 
therein. Others are so framed, as therein one may see what others 
223. doo/ in places far distant ; others, wherby you shall see men hanging 
in the aire ; others, whereby you may perceive men flieng in the 
aire ; others, wherin you may see one comming, & another going ; 
others, where one image shall seeme to be one hundred, &c. There 
be glasses also, wherein one man may see another mans image, and 
not his ovvne ; others, to make manie similitudes ; others, to make none 
at all. Others, contrarie to the use of all glasses, make the right side 
turne to the right, and the left side to the left ; others, that burne before

--- PAGE 357 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 20. 
and behind; others, that represent not the images received within them, 
but cast them farre ofif in the aire, appearing like aierie images, and 
by the collection of sunne beames, with great force setteth fier (verie 
farre off) in everie thing that may be burned. There be cleare glasses, 
that make great things seeme little, things farre off to be at hand ; 
and that which is neere, to be far off ; such things as are over us, to 
seeme under us ; and those that are under us, to be above us. There are 
some glasses also, that represent things in diverse colours, & them 
most gorgeous, speciallie any white thing. Finally, the thing most 
worthie of admiration concerning these glasses, is, that the lesser 
glass dooth lessen, the shape : but how big so ever it be, it maketh the 
shape no bigger than it is. And therfore Angiestine thinketh some 
hidden mysterie to be therein. Vitellius, and J. Bap. Neap, write 
largelie hereof. These I have for the most part scene, and have the 
receipt how to make them : which, if desire of brevitie had not for- 
bidden me, I would here have set downe. But I thinke not but 
Pharaos magicians had better experience than I for those and such 
like devises. And (as Pompanacius saith) it is most true, that some 
for these feats have beene accounted saints, some other witches. And 
therefore I sale, that the pope maketh rich witches, saints ; and 
burneth the poore witches. 
Cocerning 
these glas- 
ses remem- 
ber that 
the eiesight 
is deceived : 
for Noil est 
in specula res 
quce specula- 
tur in eo. 
3^7- 
Rash opini- 
on can ne- 
ver j udge 
soundlie. 
The XX. Chapter. 
A comparison betwixt Pharaos magicians and our witches, and how 
their cunning consisted in jtiggling knacks. 
HUS you see that it hath pleased GOD to shew unto men 
that seeke for knowledge, such cunning in finding out, 
compounding, and framing of strange and secret things, 
as thereby he seemeth to have bestowed upon man, some 
part of his divinitie. Howbeit, God (of nothing, with his word) hath 
created all things, and dooth at his will, beyond the power and also 
the reach of man, accomplish whatsoever he list. And such miracles 
in times past he wrought by the hands of his prophets, as here he did ^ 
by Moses in the presence of Pharao, which Janjies and Jambres imitation 
apishlie followed. But to affirme that they by themselves, or by all andj"m- 
the divels in hell, could doo indeed as Moses did by the power of the bres^of 
Holie-ghost, is woorsse than infidelitie. If anie object and sale, that woon'd^s. 
our witches can doo such feats with words and charms, as Pharaos 
magicians did by their art, I denie it ; and all the world will never be

--- PAGE 358 ---
2 60 '3- Ro°l^'"- 
The discoverie 
Jo. Calvine, 
lib. inslitut. i. 
cat'. 8. 224. 
C/i-. recog. 3. 
318. 
Erasl. in dis- 
putai. dc 
I a mils. 
Actions un- 
pnssible to 
divels : Ergo 
to witches 
conjurors, 
&c. 
[* Matt, s, 36] 
Jamb, de my- 
steriis. 
able to shew it. That which they did, was openlie done ; as our 
witches and conjurors never doo anie/ thing: so as these cannot doo 
as they did. And yet (as Calvine saith of them) they were but 
jugglers. Neither could they doo, as manie/ suppose. For as 
Clemens saith ; These magicians did rather seeme to doo these 
woonders, than worke them indeed. And if they made but prestigious 
shewes of things, I saie it was more than our witches can doo. For 
witchcrafts (as Erastus himselfe confesseth in drift of argument) are 
but old wives fables. If the magicians serpent had beene a verie 
serpent, it must needs have beene transformed out of the rod. And 
therein had beene a double worke of God ; to wit, the qualifieng and 
extinguishment of one substance, and the creation of another. Which 
are actions beyond the divels power, for he can neither make a bodie 
to be no bodie, nor yet no bodie to be a bodie ; as to make something 
nothing, and nothing something ; and contrarie things, one : naie, 
they cannot make one haire either white or blacke.* If Pharaos 
magicians had made verie frogs upon a sudden, whie could they not 
drive them awaie againe? It they could not hurt the frogs, whie 
should we thinke that they could make them ? Or that our witches, 
which cannot doo so much as counterfet them, can kill cattell and other 
creatures with words or wishes And therefore I saie with Jamblichus, 
QiecE fascinati imaginaimcr, prater imaginamenta nulla habent 
actionis St' essejitice veritatem ; Such things as we being bewitched 
doo imagine, have no truth at all either of action or essence, beside 
the bare imagination. 
The xxi. Chapter. 
Pharaos 
magicians 
were not 
maisters of 
their owne 
actions. 
319- 
That the serpents and frogs were trulie presented., and the water 
poisoned indeed by Jannes and Jambres, 0/ false prophets, and of 
their Jniracles, of Balams asse. 
RUELIE I thinke there were no inconvenience granted, 
though I should admit that the serpent and frogs were 
truelie presented, and the water truelie poisoned by fannes 
and fanibres ; not that they could execute such miracles of 
themselves, or by their familiars or divels : but that God, by the hands 
of those counterfet couseners, contrarie to their owne expectations, over- 
tooke them, and compelled them in their ridiculous wickednes to be/ 
instruments of his will and vengeance, upon their maister Pharao : 
so as by their hands God shewed some miracles, which he himselfe

--- PAGE 359 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 21. 261 
wrought : as appeareth in Exodus. For God did put the spirit of 
truth into Baalams mouth, who was hiered to cursse his people. 
And although he were a corrupt and false prophet, and went about a 
mischeevous enterprise ; yet God made him an instrument (against 
his will) to the confusion of the wicked. Which if it pleased God 
to doo here, as a speciall worke, whereby to shew his omnipotencie, 
to the confirmation of his peoples faith, in the doctrine of their 
Messias delivered unto them by the prophet Moses, then was it 
miraculous and extraordinarie, and not to be looked for now. And 
(as some suppose) there were then a consort or crew of false prophets, 
which could also foretell things to come, and worke miracles. I 
answer, it was extraordinarie and miraculous, & that it pleased God 
so/ to trie his people ; but he worketh not so in these dales : for the 
working of miracles is ceased. Likewise in this case it might well 
stand with Gods glorie, to use the hands of Pharaos magicians, 
towards the hardening of their maisters hart ; and to make their 
illusions and ridiculous conceipts to become effectuall. For God had 
promised and determined to harden the heart of Pharao. As for the 
miracles which Moses did, they mollified it so, as he alwaies relented 
upon the sight of the same. For unto the greatnesse of his miracles 
were added such modestie and patience, as might have mooved even 
a heart of Steele or flint. But Pharaos frowardnes alwaies grew upon 
the magicians actions : the like example, or the resemblance whereof, 
we find not againe in the scriptures. And though there were such 
people in those dales suffered and used by God, for the accomplish- 
ment of his will and secret purpose : yet it followeth not, that now, 
when Gods will is wholie revealed unto us in his word, and his sonne 
exhibited (for whome, or rather for the manifestation of whose 
comming all those things were suffered or wrought) such things and 
such people should yet continue. So as I conclude, the cause being 
taken awaie, the thing proceeding thence remaineth not. And to 
assigne our witches and conjurors their roome, is to mocke and 
contemne Gods woonderfull works ; and to oppose against them 
cousenages, juggling knacks, and things of nought. And therefore, 
as they must/ confesse, that none in these dales can doo as Moses 
did : so it may be answered, that none in these daies can doo as 
Jannes and Jaitibres did : who, if they had beene false prophets, as 
they were jugglers, had yet beene more privileged to exceed our old 
women or conjurors, in the accomplishing of miracles, or in prophe- 
sieng, &c. For who may be compared with Balaam ? Naie, I dare 
sale, that Balaams asse wrought a greater miracle, and more super- 
natural!, than either the pope or all the conjurors and witches in 
the world can doo at this daie. 
Exod. 10. 
God useth 
the wicked 
as instru- 
ments to 
execute his 
counsels & 
judgments. 
225. 
The con- 
trarie ef- 
fects that 
the mira- 
cles of Mo- 
ses and the 
miracles of 
the Aegyp- 
tian magi- 
cias wroght 
in the hart 
of Pharao. 
320.

--- PAGE 360 ---
262 
13. Bookc. 
The discoverie 
Thai the 
art of jug- 
gling is 
more, or 
at least no 
les stran^je 
in working 
miracles 
than con- 
juring, 
witchcraft, 
&c. 
To conclude, it is to be avouched (and there be proofes manifest 
enough) that our jugglers approch much neerer to resemble PJiaraos 
magicians, than either witches or conjurors, & can make a more 
livelie shew of working miracles than anie inchantors can doo : for 
these practise to shew that in action, which witches doo in words and 
termes. But that you may thinke I have reason for the maintenance 
of mine opinion in this behalfe, I will surcease by multitude of words 
to amplifie this place, referring you to the tract following of the art 
of juggling, where you shall read strange practises and cunning 
conveiances ; which bicause they cannot so convenientlie be de- 
scribed by phrase of speech, as that they should presentlie sinke into 
the capacitie of you that would be practitioners of the same ; I have 
caused them to be set foorth in forme and figure, that your under- 
standing might be somewhat helped by instrumental! demonstrations. 
And when you have perused that whole discoverie of juggling, 
compare the wonders thereof with the woonders imputed to conjurors 
and witches, (not omitting Pliaraos sorcerers at anie hand in this 
comparison) and I beleeve you will be resolved, that the miracles 
doone in Pharaos sight by them, and the miracles ascribed unto 
witches, conjurors, &c : may be well taken for false miracles, meere 
delusions, &c : and for such actions as are commonlie practised by 
cunning jugglers ; be it either by legierdemaine, confederacie, or 
otherwise./ / 
321. 226. 
The xxii. Chapter. 
In what re- 
spects jug- 
gling is tol- 
lerable and 
also com- 
mendable. 
The art of juggling discovered, and in what points it dooth 
priticipallie consist. 
1 OW because such occasion is ministred, and the matter 
so pertinent to my purpose, and also the life of witch- 
craft and cousenage so manifestlie delivered in the art 
of juggling ; I thought good to discover it, together with 
the rest of the other deceiptfuU arts ; being sorie that it falleth out 
to my lot, to laie open the secrets of this mysterie, to the hinderance 
of such poore men as live thereby : whose dooings herein are not 
onlie tollerable, but greatlie commendable, so they abuse not the 
name of God, nor make the people attribute unto them his power ; 
but alwaies acknowledge wherein the art consisteth, so as thereby 
the other unlawful! and impious arts may be by them the rather 
detected and bewraied.

--- PAGE 361 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 23. 
sist. 
The true art therefore of juggling consisteth in legierdemaine ; to 
wit, the nimble conveiance of the hand, which is especiallie per- 
formed three waies. The first and principall consisteth in hiding and The three 
conveieng of balles, the second in the alteration of monie, the third points^*^^ 
in the shuffeling of the cards. He that is expert in these may shew fggfgfji". 
much pleasure, and manie feats, and hath more cunning than all maineor 
other witches or magicians. All other parts of this art are taught "f hanT^'^ 
when they are discovered : but this part cannot be taught by any '^""''^ 
description or instruction, without great exercise and expense of 
time. And for as much as I professe rather to discover than teach 
these mysteries, it shall suffice to signifie unto you, that the endevor 
and drift of jugglers is onelie to abuse mens eies and judgements. 
Now therefore my meaning is, in words as plaine as I can, to rip up 
certeine proper tricks of that art ; whereof some are pleasant and 
delectable, other some dreadful! and desperate, and all but meere 
delusions, or counterfet actions, as you shall soone see by due obser- 
vation of everie knacke by me heereafter deciphered./ 
The xxiii. Chapter. 
Of the ball, and the matnier of legierdemame therewith, also 
notable feats with one or diverse balles. 
ONCERNING the ball, the plaies & devises thereof are 
infinite, in somuch as if you can by use handle them 
well, you may shewe therewith a hundreth feats. But 
whether you seeme to throw the ball into your left hand, 
or into your mouth, or into a pot, or up into the aier, &c : it is to be 
kept still in your right hand. If you practise first with a leaden 
bullet, you shall the sooner and better doo it with balles of corke. 
The first place at your first learning, where you are to bestow a great 
ball, is in the palme of your hand, with your ringfinger : but a small 
ball is to be placed with your/ thombe, betwixt your ringfinger and 
midlefinger, then are you to practise to doo it betwixt the other 
fingers, then betwixt the forefinger and the thombe, with the forefinger 
and midlefinger jointlie, and therein is the greatest and strangest 
cunning shewed. Lastlie the same small ball is to be practised in 
the palme of the hand, and by use you shall not onelie seeme to put 
anie one ball from you, and yet reteine it in your hand ; but you 
shall keepe foure or five as cleanelie and certeinelie as one. This 
being atteined unto, you shall worke woonderfull feats : as for 
example. 
322. 
Great vari- 
elie of plaie 
with the 
balles, &c 
227. 
These feats 
are nimbly, 
cleanly, & 
swiftly to 
be convei- 
ed ; so as the 
eies of the 
beholders 
mav not

