ich words and none 
other being in use do properlie signifie our witches) are not once 
found written in the old or new testament ; and that Christ himselfe 
in his gospell never mentioned the name of a witch, And that neither 
he, nor Moses ever spake anie one word of the witches bargaine with 
the divell, their bagging, their riding in the aire, their transferring of 
corne or grasse from one feeld to another, their hurting of children 
or cattell with words or charmes, their bewitching of butter, cheese, 
ale, &c : nor yet their transubstantiation ; insomuch as the writers Mai. maUf. 
hereupon are not ashamed to say, that it is not absurd to affirme that ^' 
there were no witches in Jobs time. The reason is, that ff there had 
beene such witches then in beeing, Job would have said he had beene 
bewitched. But indeed men looke no heed in those daies to this

--- PAGE 80 ---
xxu 
The Epistle. 
doctrine of divels ; to wit, to these fables of witchcraft, which Peter 
saith shall be much regarded and hearkened unto in the latter dales. 
Howbeit, how ancient so ever this barbarous conceipt of witches 
omnipotencie is, truth must not be measured by time : for everie old 
opinion is not sound. Veritie is not impaired, how long so ever it be 
suppressed ; but is to be searched out, in how darke a corner so ever 
it lie hidden : for it is not like a cup of ale, that may be broched too 
rathe. Finallie, time bewraieth old errors, & discovereth new matters 
of truth. Danseus himselfe saith, that this question hitherto hath 
never beene handled ; nor the scriptures concerning this matter have 
never beene expounded. To prove the antiquitie of the cause, to 
B 2 confirme the opini/on of the ignorant, to inforce mine adversaries 
arguments, to aggravate the punishments, & to accomplish the con- 
fusio of these old women, is added the vanitie and wickednes of 
them, which are called witches, the arrogancie of those which take 
B. iii. V. upon them to/ worke wonders, the desire that people have to hearken 
to such miraculous matters, unto whome most commonlie an impos- 
sibilitie is more credible than a veritie ; the ignorance of naturall 
causes, the ancient and universall hate conceived against the name 
of a witch ; their ilfavoured faces, their spitefull words, their cursses 
and imprecations, their charmes made in ryme, and their beggerie ; 
the feare of manie foolish folke, the opinion of some that are wise, 
the want of Robin goodfellowe and the fairies, which were woont to 
mainteine chat, and the common peoples talke in this behalfe ; the 
authoritie of the inquisitors, the learning, cunning, consent, and 
estimation of writers herein, the false translations and fond interpre- 
tations used, speciallie by papists ; and manie other like causes. All 
which toies take such hold upon mens fansies, as whereby they are 
lead and entised awaie from the consideration of true respects, to the 
condemnation of that which they know not. 
Howbeit, I will (by Gods grace) in this my booke, so apparentlie 
decipher and confute these cavils, and all other their objections ; as 
everie witchmoonger shall be abashed, and all good men thereby 
satisfied. In the meane time, I would wish them to know that if 
neither the estimation of Gods omnipotencie, nor the tenor of his 
word, nor the doubtfulnes or rather the impossibilitie of the case, nor 
the small proofes brought against them, nor the rigor executed upon 
them, nor the pitie that should be in a christian heart, nor yet their 
simplicitie, impotencie, or age may suffice to suppresse the rage or 
rigor wherewith they are oppressed ; yet the consideration of their 
sex or kind ought to moove some mitigatio of their punishment. 
For if nature (as Plinie reporteth) have taught a lion not to deale so 
roughlie with a woman as with a man, bicause she is in bodie the 
Pet. 4. 
Dtincpus in 
sua pro logo.

--- PAGE 81 ---
The Epistle. 
xxiii 
weaker vessell, and in hart more inclined to pitie (which Jeremie in Lam. jer. 3. 
his lamentations seemeth to confirme) what should a man doo in this ferse!^To. 
case, for whome a woman was created as an helpe and comfort unto J^[^°';g"' ^' 
him? In so much as, even in the lawe of nature, it is a greater Ge. 2. 22. 18. 
offense to slea a woman than a man : not bicause a man is not the prllum. 2. 9. 
more excellent creature, but bicause a woman is the weaker vessell. 
And therefore among all modest and honest persons it is thought a 
shame to offer violence or injurie to a woman : in which respect Vir. Georg. 
Virgil/ saith. Nullum memorabile nomen fammea in pcena est. iv.] 
God that knoweth my heart is witnes, and you that read my booke 
shall see, that my drift and purpose in this enterprise tendeth onelie 
to these respects. First, that the glorie and power of God be not so 
abridged and abased, as to be thrust into the hand or lip of a lewd 
old woman: whereby the worke of the Creator should be attributed to 
the power of a creature. Secondlie, that the religion of the gospell 
may be scene to stand without such peevish trumperie. Thirdlie, 
that lawful! favour and christian compassion be rather used towards 
these poore soules, than rigor and extremitie. Bicause they, which 
are commonlie accused of witchcraft,/ are the least sufficient of all B 2 v 
other persons to speake for themselves ; as having the most base and 
simple education of all others ; the extremitie of their age giving 
them leave to dote, their povertie to beg, their wrongs to chide and 
threaten (as being void of anie other waie of revenge) their humor 
melancholicall to be full of imaginations, from whence cheefelie pro- 
ceedeth the vanitie of their confessions ; as that they can transforme 
themselves and others into apes, owles, asses, dogs, cats, &c : that 
they can flie in the aire, kill children with charmes, hinder the 
comming of butter, c&c. 
And for so much as the mightie helpe themselves together, and the 
poore widowes crie, though it reach to heaven, is scarse heard here Ecci[us.] 35,15. 
upon earth : I thought good (according to my poore abilitie) to make 
intercession, that some part of common rigor, and some points of 
hastie judgement may be advised upon. For the world is now at that 
stay (as Brentius in a most godlie sermon in these words afifirmeth) 
that even as when the heathen persecuted the christians, if anie were 
accused to beleeve in Christ, the common people cried Ad leonem: so 
now, if anie woman, be she never so honest, be accused of witchcraft, 
they crie Ad igjiem. What difference is betweene the rash dealing of 
unskilfull people, and the grave counsell of more discreet and learned 
persons, may appeare by a tale of Dangeus his owne telling ; wherein 
he opposeth the rashnes of a few townesmen, to the counsell of a 
whole senate, preferring the follie of the one, before the wisdome of 
the other.

--- PAGE 82 ---
XXIV 
The Epistle. 
At Orleance on Loyre (saith he) there was a manwitch, not only/ 
[5. iv. r;.] taken and accused, but also convicted and condemned for witchcraft, 
who appealed from thence to the high court of Paris. Which accusa- 
tion the senate sawe insufficient, and would not allow, but laughed 
thereat, lightlie regarding it ; and in the end sent him home (saith 
he) as accused of a frivolous matter. And yet for all that, the magis- 
trats of Orleance were so bold with him, as to hang him up within 
short time after, for the same or the verie like offense. In which 
example is to be scene the nature, and as it were the disease of this 
cause : wherein (I sale) the simpler and undiscreeter sort are alwaies 
more hastie & furious in judgements, than men of better reputation 
and knowledge. Nevertheles, Eunichius saith, that these three things ; 
to wit, what is to be thought of witches, what their incantations can 
doo, and whether their punishment should extend to death, are to be 
well considered. And I would (saith he) they were as well knowne, 
as they are rashlie beleeved, both of the learned, and unlearned. 
And further he saith, that almost all divines, physicians and lawyers, 
who should best know these matters, satisfieng themselves with old 
custome, have given too much credit to these fables, and too rash and 
unjust sentence of death upon witches. But when a man pondereth 
(saith he) that in times past, all that swarved from the church of 
Rome were judged heretikes ; it is the lesse marvell, though in this 
matter they be blind and ignorant. 
And surelie, if the scripture had beene longer suppressed, more 
absurd fables would have sproong up, and beene beleeved. Which 
credulitie though it is to be derided with laughter; yet this their cruel- 
B 3 tie is to be/ lamented with teares. For (God knoweth) manie of these 
poore wretches had more need to be releeved than chastised ; and 
more meete were a preacher to admonish them, than a gailor to keepe 
them ; and a physician more necessarie to helpe them, than an 
executioner or tormentor to hang or burne them. For proofe and 
due triall hereof, I will requite Danjeus his tale of a manwitch (as he 
termeth him) with another witch of the same sex or gender. 
Lib. 15. cap. Cardanus from the mouth of his owne father reporteth, that one 
laifdrerum. Barnard, a poore servant, being in wit verie simple and rude, but in 
his service verie necessarie and diligent (and in that respect deerelie 
[B. v.] beloved of his maister) professing the art of witchcraft,/ could in no 
wise be dissuaded from that profession, persuading himselfe that he 
knew all things, and could bring anie matter to passe ; bicause cer- 
teine countrie people resorted to him for helpe and counsell, as 
supposing by his owne talke, that he could doo somewhat. At length 
he was condemned to be burned : which torment he seemed more 
willing to suffer, than to loose his estimation in that behalfe. But his

--- PAGE 83 ---
The Epistle. 
XXV 
maister having compassion upon him, and being himselfe in his 
princes favor, perceiving his conceipt to proceed of melanchohe, 
obteined respit of execution for twentie daies. In which time (saith 
he) his maister bountifullie fed him with good fat meat, and with foure 
egs at a meale, as also with sweet wine : which diet was best for so 
grosse and weake a bodie. And being recovered so in strength, that 
the humor was suppressed, he was easilie woone from his absurd and 
dangerous opinions, and from all his fond imaginations : and con- 
fessing his error and follie, from the which before no man could 
remoove him by anie persuasions, having his pardon, he lived long a 
good member of the church, whome otherwise the crueltie of judge- 
ment should have cast awaie and destroied. 
This historie is more credible than Sprengers fables, or Bodins 
babies, which reach not so far to the extolling of witches omnipotencie, 
as to the derogating of Gods glorie. For if it be true, which they 
affirme, that our life and death lieth in the hand of a witch ; then is 
it false, that God maketh us live or die, or that by him we have our 
being, our terme of life appointed, and our daies numbred. But surelie 
their charmes can no more reach to the hurting or killing of men or 
women, than their imaginations can extend to the stealing and car- 
rieng awaie of horsses & mares. Neither hath God given remedies 
to sicknes or greefes, by words or charmes, but by hearbs and 
medicines; which he himselfe hath created upon earth, and given Amos. 3.6. 
men knowledge of the same; that he might be glorified, for that La.jer. 3. 38. 
° o o 7 isai. 45. 9. 
therewith he dooth vouchsafe that the maladies of men and cattell Rom. 9. 20. 
should be cured, &c. And if there be no affliction nor calamitie, but 
is brought to passe by him, then let us defie the divell, renounce 
all his works, and not so much as once thinke or dreame upon this 
supernaturall power of witches ; neither let us prosecute them with 
such despight, whome our fansie condemneth, and our reason acquiteth : 
our/ evidence against them consisting in impossibilities, our proofes iB v. ».] 
in unwritten verities, and our whole proceedings in doubts and 
difficulties./ 
Now bicause I mislike the extreame crueltie used against some of B 3. v. 
these sillie soules (whome a simple advocate having audience and 
justice might deliver out of the hands of the inquisitors themselves) 
it will be said, that I denie anie punishment at all to be due to anie 
witch whatsoever. Naie, bicause I bewraie the follie and impietie of 
them, which attribute unto witches the power of God : these witch- 
moongers will report, that I denie there are anie witches at all : and 
yet behold (saie they) how often is this word [Witch]* mentioned in the * [ ] in text, 
scriptures ? Even as if an idolater should saie in the behalfe of 
images and idols, to them which denie their power and godhead, and 
d

--- PAGE 84 ---
XXVI 
The Epistle. 
inveigh against the reverence doone unto them ; How dare you denie 
the power of images, seeing their names are so often repeated in the 
scriptures ? But truehe I denie not that there are witches or images : 
but I detest the idolatrous opinions conceived of them ; referring that 
to Gods worke and ordinance, which they impute to the power and 
malice of witches ; and attributing that honour to God, which they 
ascribe to idols. But as for those that in verie deed are either 
witches or conjurors, let them hardlie suffer such punishment as to 
their fault is agreeable, and as by the grave judgement of lawe is 
provided. 
Places a7ne7ided by the author, and to be read as followeth. The first 
miinber standeth for the page, the second for the Ime. 
46. 16. except you. 
51. 9. one Saddocke. 
75. 21. that we of 
1 10. 21. as Elimas. 
112. 10. is reproved. 
1 19. 16. one Necus. 
126. 12. Magus as. 
138. 2. the hart. 
144. 25. in hir closet at 
Endor, or in. 
168. 31. the firmament. 
187. 16. reallie finished. 
192. put out the first line 
of the page. 
247. 29. write it. 
257. 32. an image. 
269. 16. there be masses. 
333. 14. evenlie severed. 
363. 26. for bellowes. 
366. 27. his leman. 
438. 29. exercise the. 
450. I. that it is. 
463. i9.*that businesse. 
471. 19. coteineth nothing. 
472. 1 1. I did defene. 
491. 6. so difficult. 
491. 27. begat another. 
503. 9. of all the. 
519. 7. the Hevites. 
542. 30. their reproch./ 
'Corrected in this 4th edition. The numbers of the 3rd line in original, i.e., from 438, 
are smaller."!

--- PAGE 85 ---
The forren authors used in this Booke. 
[B. vi.] [B 4] 
Lianus. 
Aetius. 
Albertus Crantzius. 
Albertus Magnus. 
Albumazar. 
Alcoranum Francisca- 
norum. 
Alexander Trallianus. 
Algerus. 
Ambrosius. 
Andradias. 
Andraeas Gartnerus. 
Andrseas Massius. 
Antonius Sabellicus. 
Apollonius Tyanasus. 
Appianus. 
Apuleius. 
Archelaus. 
Argerius Ferrarius.* 
Aristoteles. 
Arnoldus de villa nova. 
Artemidorus. 
Athanasius. 
Averroes. 
Augustinus episcopus 
Hip. 
Augustinus Niphus. 
Avicennas. 
Aulus Gellius. 
Barnardinus de bustis. 
Bartholomceus Anglicus. 
Berosus Anianus. 
Bodinus. 
Bordinus. 
Brentius. 
Calvinus. 
Camerarius. 
Campanus. 
Cardanus pater. 
Cardanus filius. 
Carolus Gallus. 
Cassander. 
Cato. 
Chrysostome. 
Cicero. 
Clemens. 
Cornelius Agrippa. 
Cornelius Nepos. 
Cornelius Tacitus. 
Cyrillus. 
Danseus. 
Demetrius. 
Democritus. 
Didymus. 
Diodorus Siculus. 
Dionysius Areopagita. 
Dioscorides. 
Diurius. 
Dodonseus. 
Durandus. 
Empedocles. 
Ephesius. 
Erasmus Roterodamus, 
Erasmus Sarcerius. 
Erastus. 
Eudoxus. 
Eusebius Ccesariensis. 
Fernelius. 
Franciscus Petrarcha. 
Fuchsius. 
Galenus. 
Garropius. 
Gelasius. 
Gemma Phrysius. 
Georgius Pictorius. 
Gofridus. 
Goschalcus Boll. 
Gratianus. 
Gregorius. 
Grillandus. 
Guido Bonatus. 
Gulielmus de sancto 
Clodoaldo. 
Gulielmus Parisiensis. 
Hemingius. 
Heraclides. 
Hermes Trismegistus. 
Hieronymus. 
JE 
Hilarius. 
Hippocrates. 
Homerus. 
Horatius. 
Hostiensis. 
Hovinus. 
Hyperius. 
Jacobus de Chusa Car- 
thusianus. 
lamblichus. 
Jaso Pratensis. 
Innocentius. 8. Papa. 
Johannes Anglicus. 
Johannes Baptista Nea- 
politanus. 
Johannes Cassianus. 
Johannes Montiregius. 
Johannes Rivius. 
Josephus ben Gorion. [*Ferre-] 
Josias Simlerus. 
Isidorus. 
Isigonus. 
Juba. 
Julius Maternus. 
Justinus Martyr. 
Lactantius. 
Lavaterus. 
Laurentius Ananias. 
Laurentius a villavi- 
centio, 
Leo II. Pontifex. 
Lex Salicarum. 
Lex 12. Tabularum. 
Legenda aurea. 
Legenda longa Colonias. 
Leonardus Vairus. 
Livius. 
Lucanus. 
Lucretius. 
Ludovicus Ccelius. 
Lutherus. 
Macrobius. 
Magna Charta. 
Malleus Maleficarum.

--- PAGE 86 ---
XXVlll 
Manlius. 
Marbacchius. 
Maibodeus Callus. 
Marsilius Ficinus. 
Martinus de Aries. 
Mattheolus. 
Melancthonus.// 
B.vi.7:] B4V. Memphradorus. 
Michael Andrseas. 
Musculus. 
Nauclerus. 
Nicephorus. 
Nicholaus 5. Papa. 
Nider. 
Olaus Goth us. 
Origincs. 
Ovidius. 
Panormitanus. 
Paulus Aegineta. 
Paulus Marsus. 
Persius. 
Petrus de Appona. 
Petrus Lombardus. 
Petrus Martyr. 
Peucer. 
Philarchus. 
Philastrius Brixiensis. 
Philodotus. 
Philo Judseus. 
Pirkmairus. 
Platina. 
Plato. 
Plinius. 
Plotinus. 
Plutarchus. 
Polydorus Virgilius. 
Pomoerium sermonur 
quadragesimalium. 
Pompanatius. 
Pontificale. 
Ponzivibius. 
Porphyrius. 
Proclus. 
Propertius. 
Psellus. 
Ptolomeus. 
Pythagoras. 
Quintilianus. 
Rabbi Abraham. 
Rabbi ben Ezra. 
Rabbi David Kimhi. 
Rabbi Josuah ben Levi. 
Rabbi Isaach Natar. 
Rabbi Levi. 
Rabbi Moses. 
Rabbi Sedaias Haias. 
Robertus Carocullus. 
Rupertus. 
Sabinus. 
Sadoletus. 
Savanorola. 
Scotus. 
Seneca. 
Septuaginta interpretes. 
Scrap io. 
Socrates. 
Solinus. 
Speculum exemplorum. 
Strabo. 
Sulpitius Severus. 
Synesius. 
Tatianus. 
Tertullianus. 
Thomas Aquinas. 
Themistius. 
Theodoretus. 
Theodorus Bizantius. 
Theophrastus. 
Thucidides. 
Tibullus. 
Tremelius. 
Valerius Maximus. 
Varro. 
Vegetius. 
Vincentius. 
Virgilius. 
Vitellius. 
Wierus. 
Xanthus historiogra- 
phus. 
^ nese English. 
Barnabe Googe. 
Beehive of the Romish 
church. 
Edward Deering. 
Geffrey Chaucer. 
Giles Alley. 
GnimelfMaharba[Abra- 
ham Fleming]. 
Henrie H award. 
John Bale. 
John Fox. 
John Malborne. 
John Record. 
Primer after Yorke use. 
Richard Gallis. 
Roger Bacon. 
Testament printed at 
Rhemes. 
T. E. a nameles author. 
467. 
Thomas Hilles. 
Thomas Lupton. 
Thomas Moore Knight. 
Thomas Phaer. 
T. R. a nameles author. 
393- 
William Lambard. 
W. W. a nameles author. 
542.

--- PAGE 87 ---
[These Contents in original end the book as do our Indices.] 
The summe of everie chapter con 
teined in the sixteeite bookes of this disco- 
verie, with the discourse of divels and 
spirits annexed thereitiito. 
^ The first Booke, 
N impeachment of witches power 
in meteors and elementarie 
bodies, tenning to the rebuke of 
such as attribute too much unto 
them. Pag. i. 
The inconvenience growing by mens cre- 
duHtie herein, with a reproofe of some 
churchmen, which are inchned to the com- 
mon conceived opinion of witches omni- 
potencie, and a familiar example thereof, 
pag. 4. 
Who they be that are called witches, with a 
manifest declaration of the cause that 
mooveth men so commonlie to thinke, & 
witches themselves to beleeve that they 
can hurt children, cattell, &c. with words 
and imaginations : and of coosening 
witches. P^g- 7- 
What miraculous actions are imputed to 
witches by witchmongers, papists, and 
poets. pag. 9. 
A confutation of the common conceived 
opinion of witches and witchcraft, and 
how detestable a sinne it is to repaire to 
them for counsell orhelpe in time of afflic- 
tion, pag. II. 
A further confutation of witches miraculous 
and omnipotent power, by invincible 
reasons and authorities, with dissuasions 
from such fond credulitie. P^tg. 12. 
By what meanes the name of witches be- 
commeth so famous, S: how diverslie 
people be opinioned concerning ihem and 
their actions. pa. 14. 
Causes that moove as well witches them- 
selves as others to thinke that they can 
worke impossibilities, with answers to 
certeine objections : where also their 
punishment by law is touched. pag, 16. 
A conclusion of the first booke, wherein is 
foreshewed the tyrannicall crueltie of 
witchmongers and inquisitors, with a re- 
quest to the reader to peruse the same, 
pag. 17. 
^ The second Booke. 
A^Hat testimonies and witnesses are 
allowed to give evidence against re- 
puted witches, by the report and allow- 
ance of the inquisitors themselves, & such 
as are speciall writers herein. Pag. 19. 
The order of examination of witches by the 
inquisitors. pag. 20. 
Matters of evidenceagainst witches, pag. 22. 
Confessions of witches, whereby they are 
condemned. pag- 24. 
Presumptions, whereby witches are con- 
demned, pag. 25. 
Particular interogatories used by the inquisi- 
tors against witches. pa. 27, 
The inquisitors trlall of weeping by conju- 
ration, pag. 29. 
Certeine cautions against witches, and of 
theirtortures to procure confession, pag.29. 
The 15. crimes laid to the charge of witches, 
by witchmongers ; specialiie by Bodin, in 
Demonomania 32. 
A refutation of the former surmised crimes 
patched toguher by Bodin, and the onelie 
waie to escape theinquisitors hands, pag. 34. 
The opinion of Cornelius Agrippa concern- 
ing witches, of his pleading/ for a poore S 
woman accused of witchcraft, and how he 
convinced the inquisitors. pag. 35. 
What the feare of death and feeling of tor- 
ments may force one to doo, and that it 
is no marvell though witches condemne 
themselves by iheir owne confessions so 
tyrannicallie extorted. pag. 37. 
^ Tke third Booke. 
T^He witches bargaine with the divell, ac- 
cording to M. Mai. Bodin, Nider, 
Daneus, Psellus, Erastus, Hemingius, Cu- 
manus, Aquinas, Bartholomeus Spineus, 
&c. Pag. 40. 
The order of the witches homage done (as it 
is written by lewd inquisitors and peevish 
witchmoongers) to the divell in person ; of 
their songs and danses, and namelie of La 
volta, and of other ceremonies, also of 
their excourses. pag- 4i. 
How witches are summoned to appeere be- 
fore the divell, of their riding in the aire, 
of their accompts, of their conference with 
the divell, of his supplies, and their con- 
ference, of their farewell and sacrifices: 
according to Daneus, Pseilus, &c. p. 43. 
That there can no real league be made with 
the divell the first author of the league, 
and the weake proofes of the adversaries 
for the same. pag. 44. 
Of the private league, a notable tale of Bo- 
dins concerning a French ladie, with a 
confutation. pag. 46.

--- PAGE 88 ---
XXX 
The Contents. 
A disproofe of their assemblies, and of their 
bargaine. pag. 47. 
A Confutation of the objection concerning 
witches confessions. pag. 49 
What follie it were for witches to enter into 
such desperate perill, and to endure such 
intollerable tortures for no gaine or com- 
moditie, and how it comes to passe that 
witches are overthrowne by their confes- 
sions. SI. 
How melancholie abuseth old women, and 
of the effects thereof by sundrie ex- 
amples, pag. 52. 
That voluntarie confessions may be untrulie 
made, to the imdooing of the confessors, 
and of the strange operation of melan- 
cholie, prooved by a familiar and late 
example. pag. 55. 
The strange and divers effects of melan- 
cholie, and how the same humor abound- 
ing in witches, or rather old women, filleth 
them full of mervellous imaginations, & 
that their confessions are not to be cre- 
dited, p. 57. 
A confutation of witches confessions, especi- 
allie concerning their league. pag. 59. 
A confutation of witches confessions, con- 
cerning making of tempests and raine : of 
the naturall cause of raine, and that 
witches or divels have no power to doo 
such things. pag. 60. 
What would ensue, if witches confessions or 
witchmogers opinions were true, concern- 
ing the effects of witchcraft, inchantments, 
&c. pag. 63. 
Examples of forren nations, who in their 
warres used the assistance of witches ; of 
eybiting witches in Ireland, of two archers 
that shot with familiars. pag. 64. 
Authorities condemning the fantasticall con- 
fessions of witches, and how a popish doc- 
tor taketh upon him to disproove the 
same. pag. 65. 
Witchmongers reasons, to proove that 
witches can worke wonders, Bodins tale of 
a Friseland preest transported, that imagi- 
nations proceeding of melancholie doo 
cause illusions. pag. 67. 
That the confession of witches is insufficient 
in civill and common law to take awaie 
life. What the sounder divines, and de- 
crees of councels determine in this 
case. pag. 68. 
Of foure capitall crimes objected against 
witches, all fullie answered & confuted as 
frivolous. pag. 70./ 
S s. ii, A request to such readers as loath to heare 
or read filthie & bawdie matters (which of 
necessitie are here to be inserted) to passe 
over eight chapters. pag. 72. 
U The fourth Booke. 
/~\F witchmoongers opinions concerning e- 
vill spirits, how they frame themselves 
in more excellent sort than God made 
us. _ Pag. 73. 
Of bawdie Incubus and Succubus, a