 And 
Greg, lib. 4. 
dialog, ca. 40. 
idem cap. 55, 
and in o- 
ther places 
elsewhere 
innumera- 
ble. 
Micha. And. 
thes. 151. 
533- 
382. 
Alex, ab A- 
lexand. lib. 4. 
genealog. die- 
ruvi. cap. rg. 
Phitarch. 
oratione ad 
Apolloniiim. 
Item. Basili- 
ens. in epist. 
Platina de 
vitis ponti- 
Naticlerus. 2 
general. 35. 
Ambr. ser. 90 
de passione 
Agn. 
Euseh. lib. 
eccles. hist- 5. 
Niceph. lib. 5 
cap. 7. 
Hieronym. 
in vita Pan. 
Theodor. lib. 
hist. 5. ca. 24. 
Athan. in 
vita A mho.

--- PAGE 546 ---
448 
Chap. 28. 
A discourse of 
534- 
" Milaiicth. 
i?i Calendar. 
Mania. 23. 
April. 
Marbacli. 
lib. de mira- 
cul, adversity 
Ins. 
Johannes Ri- 
vius de ve- 
ier. superstit. 
Athan. lib. 
99. quce. II. 
August, de 
cura pro 
mortu. ca, 13. 
Luk, 16. 
although this matter have passed so long with generall credit and 
authoritie : yet manie * grave authors have condemned/ long since 
all those vaine visions and apparitions, except such as have beene 
shewed by God, his sonne, and his angels. Athanasius saith, that 
soules once loosed from their bodies, have no more societie with 
mortall men. Atcgiistine saith, that if soules could walke and visit 
their freends, &c : or admonish them in sleepe, or otherwise, his 
mother that followed him by land and by sea would shew hir selfe 
to him, and reveale hir knowledge, or give him warning, &c. But 
most true it is that is written in the gospell ; We have Moses and the 
prophets, who are to be hearkened unto, and not the dead./ 
383. 
The xxviii. Chapter. 
Matth 17. 
Luke. 9. 
Johan. Laur. 
lib. de natur. 
dipmon. 
Mich. Andr. 
thes. 222, G^c 
Idem thes. 
235. <5r». 136. 
535- 
Idem thes. 
226. 
Th. Aq. I. pa. 
qua. 89. ar. 8, 
A confittatio7t of Johannes Lanrentius , and of manie others, main- 
ieinins^ these famed and ridiculous tales and apparitio?is, and 
what drive th them awaie : of Moses and Helias appearance in 
7nount Thabor. 
URTHERMORE, to prosecute this matter in more words; 
if I saie that these apparitions of soules are but knaveries 
and cousenages ; they object that Moses and Helias 
appeared in mount Thabor, and talked with Christ, in 
the presence of the principall apostles : yea, and that God appeared 
in the bush, &c. As though spirits and soules could doo whatsoever 
it pleaseth the Lord to doo, or appoint to be doone for his owne 
glorie, or for the manifestation of his sonne miraculouslie. And 
therefore I thought good to give you a taste of the witchmongers 
absurd opinions in this behalfe. 
And first you shall understand, that they hold, that all the soules 
in heaven may come downe and appeare to us when they list, and 
assume anie bodie saving their owne : otherwise (saie they) such 
soules should not be perfectlie happie. They saie that you may 
know the good soules from the bad verie easilie. For a damned 
soule hath a verie heavie and sowre looke ; but a saints soule hath 
a cheerefull and a merrie countenance : these also are white/ and 
shining, the other cole blacke. And these damned soules also male 
come up out of hell at their pleasure ; although Abraham made 
Dives beleeve the contrarie. They affirme that damned soules walke 
oftenest : next unto them the soules of purgatorie ; and most seldome 
the soules of saints. Also they saie that in the old lawe soules did

--- PAGE 547 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. ;8. 
449 
appeare seldome ; and after doomes daie they shall never be scene 
more : in the time of grace they shall be most frequent. The walk- 
ing of these soules (saith Michael Andr.) is a most excellent argu- 
ment for the proofe of purgatorie : for (saith he) those soules have 
testified that which the popes have affirmed in that behalfe ; to wit, 
that there is not onelie such a place of punishment, but that they are 
released from thence by masses, and such other satisfactorie works ; 
whereby the goodnes of the masse is also ratified and confirmed. 
These heavenlie or purgatorie soules (saie they) appeare most 
commonlie to them that are borne upon ember dales, and they also 
walke most usuallie on those ember daies : bicause we are in best 
state at that time to praie for the one, and to keepe companie with 
the other. Also they saie, that soules appeare oftenest by night ; 
bicause men may then be at best leasure, and most quiet. Also they 
never appeare to the whole multitude, seldome to a few, and most 
commonlie to one alone : for so one may tell a lie without control- 
ment. Also they are oftenest scene by them that are readie to die : 
as Trasilla sawe pope Fcelix ; Ursine^ Peter and Paide ; Galla 
Romana, S. Peter ; and as Miisa the maid sawe our Ladie : which 
are the most certeine appearances, credited and allowed in the church 
of Rome : also they may be seene of some, and of some other in that 
presence not seene/ at all ; as Ursine sawe Peter and Patde, and yet 
manie at that instant being present could not see anie such sight, but 
thought it a lie: as I doo. Michael Andrceas confesseth, that papists 
see more visions than protestants : he saith also, that a good soule 
can take none other shape than of a man ; marie a damned soule 
may and dooth take the shape of a blacke moore, or of a beast, or of 
a serpent, or speciallie of an heretike. The christian signes that 
drive awaie these evill soules, are the crosse, the nam.e of Jesus, and 
the relikes of saints : in the number whereof are holiwater, holie 
bread, Agnus Dei, Ss^c. For Andrew saith, that notwithstanding 
Jidiamis was/ an Apostata, and a betraier of christian religion : yet 
at an extremitie, with the onelie signe of the crosse, he drave 
awaie from him manie such evill spirits ; whereby 
also (he saith) the greatest diseases and 
sicknesses are cured, and the 
sorest dangers 
avoided. 
Gregor. in 
dial. 4. 
Mich. And. 
thcs. ^13. 
316. 317. 
Idem thes. 
346- 
Leo. serin, de 
jejtiniis 10. 
metis. 
Gelas- in epi- 
stola ad episc 
Mich. Andr. 
thes. 345- 
Greg. dial. 4. 
cap. I. 12. 14. 
Mich. And, 
thes. 347. 
Greg. dial. 4. 
cap. II. 
Mich. And. 384. 
thes. 347. 
Mich. And. 
thes. 341. 
Ide. thes. 388. 
Ide. thes. 411. 
Mai. male/. 
J. Bod. &C-. 
Mich. And. 
these. 412. 
536. 
Idem. thes. 
414. 
3

--- PAGE 548 ---
450 
Chap. 2q. 
A disco7irse of 
The xxix. Chapter. 
Gen 3. 
Gen. 3. I. 
1. Cor. II. 3. 
537- 
Sap. 2, 24. 
"' [ = hatred] 
386. 
A confutatioti of assuming of bodies, and of the serpent that 
seduced Eve. 
I 
HEY that contend so earnestlie for the divels assuming 
of bodies and visible shapes, doo thinke they have a 
great advantage by the words uttered in the third of 
Genesis, where they saie, the divell entered into a serpent 
and that by the cursse it appeareth, that the whole dis- 
pleasure of God lighted upon the poore snake onlie. How those 
words are to be considered may appeare, in that it is of purpose so 
spoken, as our weake capacities may thereby best conceive the sub- 
stance, tenor, and true meaning of the word, which is there set downe 
in the manner of a tragedie, in such humane and sensible forme, as 
woonderfullie informeth our understanding ; though it seeme contrarie 
to the spirituall course of spirits and divels, and also to the nature 
and divinitie of God himselfe ; who is infinite, and whome no man 
ever sawe with corporall eies, and lived. And doubtles, if the serpent 
there had not beene taken absolutelie, nor metaphoricallie for the 
divell, the Holie-ghost would have informed us thereof in some part 
of that storie. But to afifirme it sometimes to be a divell, and some- 
times a snake ; whereas there is no such distinction to be found or 
scene in the text, is an invention and a fetch (me thinks) beyond the 
compasse of all divinitie. Certeinlie the serpent was he that seduced 
Eve : now whether it were the divell, or a snake ; let anie wise man 
(or rather let the word of God) judge. Doubtles the scripture in 
manie places expoundeth it to be the divell. And I have (I am sure) 
one Wiseman on my side/ for the interpretation hereof, namelie 
Salomon ; who saith, Through envie* of the divell came death into 
the world : referring that to the divell, which Moses in the letter 
did to the serpent. But a better expositor hereof needeth not, 
than the text it selfe, even in the same place, where it is written ; 
I will put enmitie betweene thee and the woman, and betweene 
thy seed and hir seed : he shall breake thy head, and thou shall 
bruse his heele. What christian knoweth not, that in these words 
the mysterie of/ our redemption is comprised and promised ? Where- 
in is not meant (as manie suppose) that the common seed of 
woman shall tread upon a snakes head, and so breake it in 
peeces, &c : but that speciall seed, which is Christ, should be 
borne of a woman, to the utter overthrow of sathan, and to the

--- PAGE 549 ---
Divels and spirits. chap. 30. 451 
redemption of mankind, whose heele or flesh in his members the 
divell should bruse and assault, with continuall attempts, and carnall 
provocations, &c. 
The XXX. Chapter. 
The objection concerning the divels assieming of the serpents 
bodie answered. 
[his word Serpent in holie scripture is taken for the 
divell : The serpent was more subtill than all the beasts Gen. 3, i. 
of the feeld. It likewise signifieth such as be evill 
speakers, such as have slandering toongs, also heretiks, 
&c : They have sharpned their toongs like serpents. It dooth likewise Psal. 139, 4. 
betoken the death and sacrifice of Christ: As Moses lifted up the Num. 8. & 9. 
serpent in the wildernesse, so must the sonne of man be lifted up J°'^"'3''4- 
upon the crosse. Moreover, it is taken for wicked men : O yee 
serpents and generation of vipers. Thereby also is signified as well ^3, 33- 
a wise as a subtile man : and in that sense did Christ himselfe use 
it ; saieng, Be ye wise as serpents, &c. So that by this breefe Matt. 10, 16. 
collection you see, that the word serpent, as it is equivocall, so like- 
wise it is sometimes taken in the good and sometimes in the evill 
part. But where it is said, that the serpent was father of lies, author 
of death, and the worker of deceipt : me/ thinks it is a ridiculous ^38. 
opinion to hold, that thereby a snake is meant ; which must be, if the 
letter be preferred before the allegorie. Trulie Calvines opinion is to Cai. in Ge- 
be liked and reverenced, and his example to be embraced and ' 
^' 
followed, in that he offereth to subscribe to them that hold, that the 
Holie-ghost in that place did of purpose use obscure figures, that the 
cleare light thereof might be deferred, till Christs comming. He saith idem ibid. 
also with like commendation (speaking hereof, and writing upon this 
place) that Moses doth accommodate and fitten for the understanding 
of the common people, in a rude and grosse stile, those things which 
he there delivereth ; forbearing once to rehearse the name of sathan. 
And further he saith, that this order may not be thought of Moses his idem ibid. 
owne devise ; but to be taught him by the spirit of God : for such 
was (saith he) in those daies the childish age of the church, which idun ibid. 
was unable to receive higher or profounder doctrine. Finallie, he 
saith even hereupon, that the Lord hath supplied, with the secret 
light of his spirit, whatsoever wanted in plainenes and clearenes of 
externall words. 
If it be said, according to experience, that certeine other beasts are

--- PAGE 550 ---
452 Chap. 31. A discourse of 
farre more siibtill than the serpent : they answer, that it is not absurd 
to confesse, that the same gift was taken awaie from him, by God, 
bicause he brought destruction to mankind. Which is more (me 
Matt. 10, i6. thinkes) than need be granted in that behalfe. For Christ saith not ; 
386. Be yea wise as serpents/ were before their transgression : but, Be 
wise as serpents are. I would learne what impietie, absurditie, 
or offense it is to hold, that Moses, under the person of the poisoning 
serpent or snake, describeth the divell that poisoned Eve with his 
Isai 30, 6. deceiptfull words, and venomous assault. Whence commeth it else, 
^' that the divell is called so often. The viper. The serpent, &c : and 
Luk. 3, &c. that his children are called the generation of vipers ; but upon this 
^" ^' first description of the divell made by Moses'i For I thinke none so 
grosse, as to suppose, that the wicked are the children of snakes, 
according to the letter : no more than we are to thinke and gather, 
that God keepeth a booke of life, written with penne and inke upon 
paper ; as citizens record their free men./ 
539- 
The xxxi. Chapter. 
Familic of 
love. 
Of ike cursse rehearsed Ge7t. 3. and that place rightlie expounded, 
John Calvines opinion of the divell. 
|HE cursse rehearsed by God in that place, whereby witch- 
mongers labour so busilie to proove that the divell en- 
tered into the bodie of a snake, and by consequence can 
take the bodie of anie other creature at his pleasure, &c: 
reacheth (I thinke) further into the divels matters, than we can com- 
prehend, or is needfull for us to know, that understand not the waies 
of the divels creeping, and is farre unlikelie to extend to plague the 
generation of snakes : as though they had beene made with legs 
before that time, and through this cursse were deprived of that 
benefit. And yet, if the divell should have entred into the snake, in 
maner and forme as they suppose ; I cannot see in what degree of 
sinne the poore snake should be so guiltie, as that God, who is the 
most righteous judge, might be offended with him. But although I 
abhorre that lewd interpretation of the familie of love, and such 
other heretikes, as would reduce the whole Bible into allegories : yet 
(me thinkes) the creeping there is rather metaphoricallie or significa- 
tivelie spoken, than literallie ; even by that figure, which is there 
prosecuted to the end. Wherein the divell is resembled to an odious 
creature, who as he creepeth upon us to annoie our bodies ; so doth

--- PAGE 551 ---
Dive Is and spirits. 
Chap. 32. 
453 
the divell there creepe into the conscience of Eve, to abuse and 
deceive hir : whose seed nevertheles shall tread dovvne and dissolve 
his power and malice. And through him, all good christians (as 
Calvine saith) obteine power to doo the like. For we may not ima- j. Cai. m. in 
gine such a materiall tragedie, as there is described, for the ease of j^''/ ts'^"^ 
our feeble and weake capacities. 
For whensoever we find in the scriptures, that the divell is called) 
god, the prince of the world, a strong armed man, to whome is given 
the power of the aier, a roring lion, a serpent, &c : the Holie-ghost 
mooved us thereby, to beware of the most subtill, strong and mightie 
enimie, and to make prepara/tion, and arme our selves with faith 54^- 
against so terrible an adversarie. And this is the opinion and coun- J- Cai. u. ins 
sell of Calvine, that we seeing our owne weakenes, & his force mani- X^!^^' 
fested in such termes, may beware o '/ the divell, and may flie to God 387. 
for spirituall aid and comfort. And as for his corporall assaults, or 
his attempts upon our bodies, his nightwalkings, his visible appear- 
ings, his dansing with witches, &c : we are neither warned in the 
scriptures of them, nor willed by God or his prophets to flie them ; 
neither is there anie mention made of them in the scriptures. And 
therefore thinke I those witchmongers and absurd writers to be as 
grosse on the one side, as the Saddttces are impious and fond on the 
other ; which sale, that spirits and divels are onlie motions and 
affections, and that angels are but tokens of Gods power. I for my 
part confesse with Aicgiistine, that these matters are above my reach Aug.de cura 
and capacitie : and yet so farre as Gods word teacheth me, I will i"'""""'-^'-- 
not sticke to sale, that they are living creatures, ordeined to serve the 
Lord in their vocation. And although they abode not in their first 
estate, yet that they are the Lords ministers, and executioners of his 
wrath, to trie and tempt in this world, and to punish the reprobate in 
hell fier in the world to come. 
The xxxii. Chapter. 
Mi7te owne opinion and resolution of the nature of spirits, and of 
the divell, with his properties. 
|UT to use few words in a long matter, and plaine termes 
in a doubtfull case, this is mine opinion concerning this 
present argument. First, that divels are spirits, and no 
bodies. For (as Peter Martyr saith) spirits and bodies 
are by antithesis opposed one to another : so as a bodie is no spirit. 
p. Mart. i. 
loc. com. 9. 
sect. 14.

--- PAGE 552 ---
454 
Chap. 32, 
A discourse of 
541- 
> I. Sam. 22 
Lul- 8. 
JoV.1.8. 
Eph. 6. 
2. Tim. 2 
I. Pet. 5. 
•"Coloss. I, 
verse. 16. 
I. Cor. 10. 
Matth. 8, 
&, 10. 
Luke. 4. 
<=. Sap. I. 
Apocal. 4. 
<* I. Tim. 4, 4 
« Gen. I. 
f Gen. 8. 44. 
I. Joh. 3. 8. 
Isai. 54. 16. 
Edw. Dee- 
ring, in his 
read, upon 
the Hebr. i. 
reading 
the 6. 
388. 
Eph. 5, 12. 
Col. 2, 16. 
Matth. 25. 
I . Pet. 5. 
Idem ibid. 
Matt. 25. 41. 
Mai. male/, 
par. I. qua. 5. 
542. 
The ety- 
mon of the 
word Dia- 
bolus. 
nor a spirit a bodie. And that the divell, whether he be manie or 
one (for by the vvaie you shall understand, that he is so spoken of in 
the scriptures, as though there were *but one, and sometimes as though 
^ one/ were manie legions, the sense whereof I have alreadie declared 
according to Calvins opinion, he is a creature made by God, and that 
for vengeance, as it is written in Eccl. 39. verse. 28 : and of him- 
selfe naught, though emploied by God to necessarie and good pur- 
poses. For in places, where it is written, that all the creatures of 
God are good ; and againe, when God, in the creation of the world, 
^ sawe all that he had made was good : the divell is not comprehended 
within those words of commendation. For it is written that he was 
a 'murtherer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, bicause 
there is no truth in him ; but when he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of 
his owne, as being a lier, and the father of lies, and (as John saith) a 
sinner from the beginning. Neither was his creation (so farre as I 
can find) in that weeke that God made man, and those other creatures 
mentioned in Genesis the first ; and yet God created him purposelie 
to destroie. I take his substance to be such as no man can by learn- 
ing define, nor by wisedome search out. M. Deering saith, that 
Paule himselfe, reckoning up principalities, powers, &c : addeth, 
Everie name that is named in this world, or in the world to come. 
A cleere sentence (saith he) of Paules modestie, in confessing a holie 
ignorance of the state/ of angels : which name is also given to divels 
in other places of the scripture. His essence also and his forme is 
so proper and peculiar (in mine opinion) unto himselfe, as he himselfe 
cannot alter it, but must needs be content therewith, as with that 
which God hath ordeined for him, and assigned unto him, as pecu- 
liarlie as he hath given to us our substance without power to alter 
the same at our pleasures. For we find not that a spirit can make a 
bodie, more than a bodie can make a spirit : the spirit of God 
excepted, which is omnipotent. Nevertheles, I learne that their 
nature is prone to all mischeefe : for as the verie signification of an 
enimie and an accuser is wrapped up in Sathan and Diabolus ; so 
dooth Christ himselfe declare him to be in the thirteenth of Matthew. 
And therefore he brooketh well his name : for he lieth dailie in wait, 
not onelie to corrupt, but also to destroie mankind ; being (I saie) 
the verie tormentor appointed by God to afflict the wicked in this 
world with wicked temptations, and in the world to come with hell 
fier. But I may not here forget how M. Mai. and the residue of that 
crew doo ex/pound this word Diabolus : for Dia (saie they) is Duo, 
and Bolus is Morsellus ; whereby they gather that the divell eateth 
up a man both bodie and soule at two morselles. Whereas in truth 
the wicked may be said to eate up and swallowe downe the divell,

--- PAGE 553 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 33. 
455 
rather than the divell to eate up them ; though it may well be said 
by a figure, that the divell like a roring lion seeketh whome he may 
devoure : which is nient of the soule and spirituall devouring, as verie 
novices in religion may judge. 
The xxxiii. Chapter. 
Against fojid witchinongers, and their opinions concerning 
corporall divels. 
OW, how Brian Darcies he spirits and shee spirits, Tittie 
and Tiffin, Suckin and Pidgin, Liard and Robin, &c : his 
white spirits and blacke spirits, graie spirits and red 
spirits, divell tode and divell lambe, divels cat and divels 
dam, agree herewithall, or can stand consonant with the word of 
GOD, or true philosophic, let heaven and earth judge. In the meane 
time, let anie man with good consideration peruse that booke pub- 
lished by W. IV. and it shall suffice to satisfie him in all that may be The booke 
required touching the vanities of the witches examinations, confes- published, 
sions, and executions : where, though the tale be told onlie of the 
accusers part, without anie other answer of theirs than their adver- 
sarie setteth downe; mine assertion will be sufficientlie prooved true. 
And bicause it seemeth to be performed with some kind of authoritie, 
I will sale no more for the confutation thereof, but referre you to the 
booke it selfe ; whereto if nothing be added that may make to their 
reproch, I dare warrant nothing is left out that may serve to their 
condemnation. See whether the witnesses be not single of what 
credit, sex and age they are ; namelie lewd, miserable, and envious 
poore people ; most of them which/ speake to anie purpose being old 389. 
women, & children of the age of 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. or 9. yeares. 
And note how and what the witches confesse, and see of what 
weight and importance the causes are ; whether their confessions/ be J43- 
not woonne through hope of favour, and extorted by flatterie or 
threats, without proofe. But in so much as there were not past 
seventeene or eighteene condemned at once at S. Osees in the countie At s. Osees 
of Essex, being a whole parish (though of no great quantitie) I will 'v^i'tches^co 
sale the lesse : trusting that by this time there remaine not manie in demned at 
that parish. If anie be yet behind, I doubt not, but Brian Darcie 
will find them out ; who, if he lacke aid, Richard Gallis of Windesor 
were meete to be associated with him ; which Gallis hath set foorth 
another booke to that effect, of certeine witches of Windsore executed 
once.

--- PAGE 554 ---
456 
Chap. 34. 
A discourse of 
at Abingto7i. But with what impudencie and dishonestie he hath 
finished it, with what lies and forgeries he hath furnished it, what 
follie and frensie he hath uttered in it; I am ashamed to report : and 
therefore being but a two pennie booke, I had rather desire you to 
buie it, and so to peruse it, than to fill my booke with such beastlie 
stuffe. 
The xxxiiii. Chapter. 
[*' [] in text.] 
Isai. 30, 28. 
5- 
Zach. 6, 
Gen. I, 2. 
Joh. 3, 8. 344. 
Eras. Sar- 
cer. in dictio. 
Scholast. 
doctr. lit. S. 
390. 
A conchision •wherein the Spirit of spirits is described, by the illu- 
mination of wliich spirit all spirits are to be tried : with a con- 
futatio7i of the Pneumatomachi fiat lie denieng the divinitie of 
this Spirit. 
OUCHING the manifold signification of this word [Spirit]* 
I have elsewhere in this breefe discourse told you my 
mind : which is a word nothing differing in Hebrue from 
breath or wind. For all these words following ; to wit, 
Spiritus, Vefttus, Flatus, Halitus, are indifferentlie used by the Holie- 
ghost, and called by this Hebrue word p]^^ ii^ the sacred scripture. 
For further proofe whereof I cite unto you the words of Isaie ; For 
his spirit (or breath) is as a river that overfloweth up to the necke, 
&c : in which place the prophet describeth the comming of God in 
heate and indignation unto judgement, &c. I cite also unto you the 
words of Zacharie ; These are the foure spirits of the heaven, &c. 
Likewise in Genesis; And the spirit of GOD mooved upon the waters. 
Moreover, I cite unto you the words of Christ ; The spirit (or/ wind) 
bloweth where it listeth. Unto which said places infinite more might 
be added out of holie writ, tending all to this purpose ; namelie, to 
give us this for a note, that all the saiengs above cited, with manie 
more that I could alledge, where mention is made of spirit, the 
Hebrue text useth no word but one ; to wit, rTl^ which signifieth 
(as I said) Spiritum, ventutn,flatum, halitum ; which may be Eng- 
lished, Spirit, wind, blast, breath. 
But before I enter upon the verie point of my purpose, it shall not 
be amisse, to make you acquainted with the collection of a certeine 
Schoole divine, who distinguisheth and divideth this word [Spirit]* 
into si.x significations ; saieng that it is 