e purged. For they have 
authoritie to exchange the punishment of the bodie with the punish- 
ment of the pursse, appheng the same to the office of their inquisi- 
tion : whereby they reape such profit, as a number of 
these seelie women paie them yeerelie pen- 
sions, to the end they may 
not be punished 
againe. 
The question 
or matter in 
controversie ; 
that is to sa)', 
the proposition 
or theme. 
24. 
35- 
A generall error. 
The onelie way 
for witches to 
avoid the in- 
quisitors handb

--- PAGE 126 ---
}. Booke. 
The discoverie 
The eleventh Chapter. 
3(>- 
33. 
A bitter invec- 
tive against a 
cruell inquisitor. 
The opinion of Cornelius Agrippa concerning witches, of his 
pleadi}tg for a poore woman accused of witchcraft, and how he 
convi)iced the inquisitors. 
ORNELIUS AGRIPPA saith, that while he was in 
Italic, manie inquisitors in the dutchie oiMilleti troubled 
divers most honest & noble matrones, privilie wringing 
much monie from them, untill their knaverie was 
detected. Further he saith, that being an advocate or councellor 
in the Commonwelth of Maestright in Brabant, he had sore 
contention with an inquisitor, who through un / just accusations 
drew a poore woman of the countrie into his butcherie, and to an unfit 
place ; not so much to examine hir, as to torment hir. Whom when 
C. Agrippa had undertaken to defend, declaring that in the things 
doone, there was no proofe, no signe or token that could cause hir to 
be tormented ; the inquisitor stoutlie denieng it, said ; One thing 
there is, which is proofe and matter sufficient : for hir mother was in 
times past burned for a witch. Now when Agrippa replied, affirming 
that this article was impertinent, and ought to be refused by the judge, 
as being the deed of another ; alledging to the inquisitor, reasons and 
lawe for the same : he replied againe that this was true, bicause they 
used to sacrifice their children to the divell, as soone as they were 
borne ; and also bicause they usuallie conceived by spirits transformed 
into mans shape, and that thereby witchcraft was naturallie ingraffed 
into this child, as a disease that commeth by inheritance. / 
C. Agrippa replieng against the inquisitors follie & superstitious 
blindnesse, said ; O thou wicked preest ! Is this thy divinitie? Boost 
thou use to drawe poore guiltlesse women to the racke by these forged 
devises ? Boost thou with such sentences judge others to be heretikes, 
thou being a more heretike than either Faustus or Donatus ? Be it 
as thou saiest, dooest thou not frustrate the grace of Gods ordinance ; 
namelie baptisme? Are the words in baptisme spoken in vaine? Or 
shall the divell rem.aine in the child, or it in the power of the divell, 
being there and then consecrated to Christ Jesus, in the name of the 
father, the sonne, and the holie ghost 
And if thou defend their 
false opinions, which affirm, that spirits accompanieng with women, 
can ingender ; yet dotest thou more than anie of them, which never 
beleeved that anie of those divels, togither with their stolne seed, doo 
put part of that their seed or nature into the creature. But though 
indeed we be borne the children of the divell and damnation, yet 
in baptisme, through grace in Christ, sathan is cast out, and we are

--- PAGE 127 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 12. 29 
made new creatures in the Lord, from whome none can be separated 
by another mans deed. The inquisitor being hereat offended, 
threatened the advocate to proceed against him, as a supporter of 
heretikes or witches ; yet neverthelesse he ceased not to defend the 
seehe woman, and througli the power of the lawe he dehvered hir / J7. 
from tlie clawes of the bloodie moonlce, who with hir accusers, were 
condemned in a great summe of monie to the charter of the church 
of Afentz, and remained infamous after that time almost to all men. 
But by the waie you must understand, that this was but a petie in- 
quisitor, and bad not so large a commission as Ctemamcs, Sprenger, 
and such other had ; nor yet as the Spanish inquisitors at this dale 
have. For these will admit no advocats now unto the poore soules, 
except the tormentor or hangman may be called an advocate. You 
may read the summe of this inquisition in few words set out by M. 
John Fox in the Acts and monuments. For witches and heretikes Joim Fox in 
.... r iM • • 1 1 the acts and 
are among the mquisitors of like reputation ; saving that the ex- monuments, 
tremitie is greater against witches, bicause through their simplicitie, 
they may the more boldlie tyrannize upon them, and triumph over 
them. 
The twelfe Chapter. 
What the feare of death and feeling of torments may force one to 
doo, and that it is no marvell though witches condenme themselves 
by their owne confessions so tyrannicallie extorted. 
E that readeth the ecclesiasticall histories, or remembreth 
the persecutions in Queene Maries time, shall find, that 
manie good men have fallen for feare of persecution, and 
returned unto the Lord againe. What marvell then, 
though a poore woman, such a one as is described else-where, & 
tormented as is declared in these latter leaves, be made to confesse 
such absurd and false impossibilities ; when flesh and bloud is 
unable to endure such triall ? Or how can she in the middest of such 
horrible tortures/ and torments, promise unto hir selfe constancie ; or 34. 
forbeare to confesse anie thing .'' Or what availeth it hir, to persevere 
in the deniall of such matters, as are laid to her charge unjustlie ; 
when on the one side there is never anie end of hir torments ; on 
the other side, / if she continue in hir assertion, they sale she hath 38. 
charmes for taciturnitie or silence ? 
Peter the apostle renounced, curssed, and forsware his maister and Peters apostacie 
our Saviour Jesus Christ, for feare of a wenches manaces ; or rather of Chn"st.""^ 
at a question demanded by hir, wherein he was not so circumvented, 
as these poore witches are, which be not examined by girles, but by

--- PAGE 128 ---
3, Booke. 
T/ie discoverie 
cunning inquisitors, who having the spoile of their goods, and bringing 
with them into the place of judgement minds to maintaine their bloudie 
purpose, spare no maner of allurements, thretenings, nor torments, 
untill they have wroong out of them all that, which either maketh 
to their owne desire, or serveth to the others destruction. 
Peter (I sale) in the presence of his Lord and maister Christ, who 
had instructed him in true knowledge manie yeares, being fore- 
warned, not passing foure or five houres before, and having made a 
reall league and a faithfull promise to the contrarie, without anie 
other compulsion than (as hath beene said) by a question proposed by 
a girle, against his conscience, forsooke, thrise denied, and aban- 
doned his said maister : and yet he was a man illuminated, and placed 
in dignitie aloft, and neerer to Christ by manie degrees, than the 
witch, whose fall could not be so great as Peters j bicause she never 
ascended halfe so manie steps. A pastors declination is much more 
abhominable that the going astraie of anie of his sheepe : as an ambas- 
sadors conspiracie is more odious than the falshood of a common 
person : or as a capteins treason is more mischeevous than a private 
soldiers mutinie. If you saie, Peter repented ; I answer that the 
witch dooth so likewise sometimes, and I see not in that case, but 
mercie may be emploied upon hir. It were a mightie temptation to a 
seelie old woman, that a visible divell (being in shape so ugglie, as 
Danmis and others saie he is) should assalt hir in maner and forme 
as is supposed, or rather avowed ; speciallie when there is promise 
made that none shall be tempted above their strength. The poore 
old witch is commonlie unlearned, unwarned, and unprovided of 
counsell and freendship, void of judgement and discretion to moderate 
hir life and communication, hir kind and gender more weake and 
fraile than the masculine, and much more subject to melancholie ; hir 
bringing up and companie is so base, that nothing is to be / looked for 
in hir speciallie of these extraordinarie qualities ; hir age also is com- 
monlie such, as maketh her decrepite, which is a di sease that mooveth 
them to these follies. 
Finallie, Christ did cleerelie remit Peter, though his offense were 
committed both against his divine and humane person : yea after- 
wards he did put him in trust to feed his sheepe, and shewed 
great countenance, freendship and love unto him. And there- 
fore I see not, but we may shew compassion upon 
these poore soules ; if they shew themselves 
sorrowfull for their misconceipts 
and wicked imagina- 
tions./

--- PAGE 129 ---
of Witchc7'aft. 
Chap. I. 
31 
^ The third Booke. 
The first Chapter. 
The witches bargaiiie with the divell, according to M. Mai. Bodin, 
Nider, Danaus, Psellus, Erastus, Hemingius, Cionatms, Aquinas^ 
Bartholomceus Spinetes, &'c. 
I HAT which in this matter of witchcraft hath abused so 
manie, and seemeth both so horrible and intollerable, is 
a plaine bargaine, that (they saie) is made betwixt the 
divell and the witch. And manie of great learning con- 
ceive it to be a matter of truth, and in their writings publish it 
accordinglie : the which (by Gods grace) shall be prooved as vaine 
and false as the rest. 
The order of their bargaine or profession is double ; the one 
solemne and publike ; the other secret and private. That which is 
called solemne or publike, is where witches come togither at certeine 
assemblies, at the times prefixed, and doo not onelie see the divell in 
visible forme ; but confer and talke familiarlie with him. In which 
conference the divell exhorteth them to observe their fidelitie unto 
him, promising them long life and prosperitie. Then the witches 
assembled, commend a new disciple (whom they call a novice) unto 
him : and if the divell find that yoong witch apt and forward in re- 
nunciation of christian faith, in despising anie of the seven sacra- 
ments, in treading upon crosses, in spetting at the time of the 
elevation, in breaking their fast on fasting daies, and fasting on sun- 
daies ; then the divell giveth foorth / his hand, and the novice joining 
hand in hand with him, promiseth to observe and keepe all the divels 
commandements. 
This done, the divell beginneth to be more bold with hir, telling 
hir plainlie, that all this will not serve his turne ; and there- 
fore requireth homage at hir hands : yea he also telleth hir, that she 
must grant him both hir bodie and soule to be tormented in ever- 
lasting fire : which she yeeldeth unto. Then he chargeth hir, to pro- 
cure as manie men, women, and children also, as she can, to enter 
into this societie. Then he teacheth them to make ointments of the 
bowels and members of children, whereby they ride in the aire, and 
accomplish all their desires. So as, if there be anie children unbap- 
tised, or not garded with the signe of the crosse, or orizons ; then the 
witches may and doo catch them from their mothers sides in the 
night, or out of their cradles, or otherwise kill them with their cere- 
40. 35. 
The double 
bargane of 
witches with 
the divell. 
41. 
Mai. male/, 
de modo pro- 
/essiotiis.

--- PAGE 130 ---
32 
3. Bnnke. 
TJic discoverie 
36. 
Homage of 
witches to the 
divell. 
42, 
Bat . Sfineus, 
cap. I. in novo 
Mai. male/. 
Idem Ibid. 
I. Bod. de 
damon. lib. 2, 
cap. 4. 
monies ; and after buriall steale them out of their graves, and seeth 
them in a caldron, untill their flesh be made potable. Of the thickest 
whereof they make ointments, whereby they ride in the aire ; but the 
thinner potion they put into flaggons, whereof whosoever drinketh, 
observing certeine ceremonies, immediatlie becommeth a maister or 
rather a mistresse in that practise and facultie./ 
The second Chapter. 
The order of the ivitches lioviage done (as it is written by lewd 
i7iqtiisitors and peevish witchnioongers) to the divell in person j of 
their songs and danses, a?id nanielie of La volta, and of other 
ceremonies, also of their excoicrses. 
OMETIMES their homage with their oth and bargaine 
is received for a certeine terme of yeares ; sometimes for 
ever. Sometimes it consisteth in the deniall of the 
whole faith, sometimes in part. The first is, when the 
soule is absolutelie yeelded to the divell and hell fier : the other is, 
when they have but bargained [not] to / observe certeine ceremonies 
and statutes of the church ; as to conceale faults at shrift, to fast on 
sundaies, &c. And this is doone either by oth, protestation of words, 
or by obligation in writing, sometimes sealed with wax, sometimes 
signed with bloud, sometimes by kissing the divels bare buttocks ; as 
did a Doctor called Edliii, who as {Bodin saith) was burned for 
witchcraft. 
You must also understand, that after they have delicatlie banketted 
with the divell and the ladie of the fairies ; and have eaten up a fat 
oxe, and emptied a butt of malmesie, and a binne of bread at some 
noble mans house, in the dead of the night, nothing is missed of all 
this in the morning. For the ladie Sibylla, Minerva, or Diana with 
a golden rod striketh the vessell & the binne, and they are fullie re- 
plenished againe. Yea, she causeth the bullocks bones to be brought 
and laid togither upon the hide, and lappeth the foure ends thereof 
togither, laieng her golden rod thereon ; and then riseth up the bul- 
locke againe in his former estate and condition : and yet at their 
returne home they are like to starve for hunger ; as Spineus saith. And 
this must be an infallible rule, that everie fortnight, or at the least everie 
moneth, each witch must kill one child at the least for hir part. 
And here some of Monsieur Bodins lies may be inserted, who saith 
that at these magicall assemblies, the witches never faile to danse ; 
and in their danse they sing these words ; Har har, divell divell, 
danse here, danse here, plaie here, plaie here, Sabbath, sabbath. And 
whiles they sing and danse, everie one hath a broome in hir hand,

--- PAGE 131 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 3. 33 
and holdeth it up aloft. Item he saith, that these night-walking or 
rather night-dansing witches, brought out of Italic into France, that 
danse, which is called La volta. 
A part of their league is, to scrape off the oile, which is received Mai. male/. 
in extreame follie (unction I should have said). But if that be so 
dangerous, they which socke the corps had neede to take great 
care, that they rub not off the oile, which divers other waies may 
also be thrust out of the forehead ; and then I perceive all the ver- 
tue thereof is gone, and farewell it. But I marvell how they 
take on to preserve the water powred on them in baptisme, 
which I take to be largelie of as great force as the other ; and yet 
I thinke is commonlie wiped and washed off, within foure and 
twentie houres / after baptisme : but this agreeth with the residue / 37. 43- 
of their follie. 
And this is to be noted, that the inquisitors affirme, that during the 
whole time of the witches excourse, the divell occupieth the roome 
and place of the witch, in so perfect a similitude, as hir husband in 
his bed, neither by feeling, speech, nor countenance can discerne hir 
from his wife. Yea the wife departeth out of her husbands armes 
insensiblie, and leaveth the divell in hir roome visiblie. Wherein their 
incredulitie is incredible, who will have a verie bodie in the feined 
plaie, and a phantasticall bodie in the true bed : and yet (forsooth) at 
the name of Jesus, or at the signe of the crosse, all these bodihe Grillandus. 
witches (they sale) vanish awaie. t'oL tract' 
The third Chapter, 
How witches are sunwioned to appeere before the divell, of their 
riding in the aire, of their accompts, of their confereiice with the 
divell, of his supplies, and their conference, of their farewell and 
sacrifices : according to DancBUs, Psellus, &^c. 
ITHERTO, for the most part, are the verie words 
conteined in M. Mai. or Bodin, or rather in both ; 
or else in the new M. Mai. or at the least-wise of 
some writer or other, that mainteineth the almightie 
power of witches. But DancEUS saith, the divell oftentimes in Damons in 
the likenes of a sumner, meeteth them at markets and faires, '^''^^"s- "^f- 4 
and warneth them to appeere in their assemblies, at a certeine 
houre in the night, that he may understand whom they have slaine, 
and how they have profited. If they be lame, he saith the divell 
delivereth them a staffe, to conveie them thither invisiblie through the 
i aire ; and that then they fal} a dansing and singing of bawdie songs, 
wherein he leadeth the danse himselfe. Which danse, and other 
conferencies being ended, he supplieth their wants of powders and 
F

--- PAGE 132 ---
34 
3. Bookf. 
TJie discoverie 
44- 
Ide. Ibidem. 
Idem, in dia- 
log, cap. 3. 
Card. lib. de 
var. reriim. 
15. cap. go. 
38. 
Nal. Male/, 
par. 3. quce.f. 
cap. 2, 
roots to intoxicate withall ; and giveth to everie novice a marke, either 
with his teeth or with his clawes, and so they kisse the divels bare 
buttocks, and depart : / not forgetting every daie afterwards to offer to 
him, dogs, cats, hens, or bloud of their owne. And all this dooth 
DancEus report as a troth, and as it were upon his owne knowledge. 
And yet else-where he saieth ; In these matters they doo but dreame, 
and doo not those things indeed, which they confesse through their 
distemperature, growing of their melancholike humor : and there- 
fore (saith he) these things, which they report of themselves, are but 
meere illusions. 
Pselliis addeth hereunto, that certeine magicall heretikes, to wit ; 
the Etdychians, assemblie themselves everie good fridaie at night ; 
and putting out the candles, doo commit incestuous adulterie, the 
father with the daughter, the sister with the brother, and the soruie 
with the mother ; and the ninth moneth they returne and are delivered ; 
and cutting their children in peeces, fill their pots with their bloud ; 
then burne they the carcases, and mingle the ashes therewith, and so 
preserve the same for magicall purposes. Cardantcs writeth (though 
in mine opinion not verie/ probablie) that these excourses, dansmgs, 
&c : had their beginning from certeine heretikes called Dtihini., vvho 
devised those feasts of Bacchus which are named Orgia, whereunto 
these kind of people openlie assembled ; and beginning with riot, 
ended with this follie. Which feasts being prohibited, they never- 
theles hanted them secretlie ; and when they could not doo so, then 
did they it in cogitation onelie, and even to this daie (saith he) there 
remaineth a certeine image or resemblance thereof among our 
melancholike women. 
The fourth Chapter. 
That there can no reall league be made with the divell the first 
author of the league, a7id the weake proof es of the adjiersaries for 
the same. 
F the league be untrue, as are the residue of their 
confessions, the witchmongers arguments fall to the 
ground : for all the writers herein hold this bargaine 
for certeine, good, and granted, and as their onelie 
But surelie the/ indentures, conteining those covenants, 
are sealed with butter ; and the labels are but babies. What firme 
bargaine can be made betwixt a carnall bodie and a spirituall 
Let 
any wise or honest man tell me, that either hath beene a partie, or a 
witnesse ; and I will beleeve him. But by what authoritie, proofe, or 
testimonie; and upon what ground all this geere standeth, if you read 
M. Mai. you shall find, to the shame of the reporters (who doo so 
4J. maxime.

--- PAGE 133 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. s. 
35 
varie in their tales, and are at such contrarietie :) and to the reproch 
of the beleevers of such absurd hes. 
For the beginning of the credit hereof, resteth upon the confession Upon what 
of a baggage yoong fellow condemned to be burnt for witchcraft ; SaMeague 
who said to the inquisitors, of likelihood to prolong his life, (if at ''^s^" t° 
. . AO 7 V growe in 
leastwise the stone be true, which is taken out of Nider j) If I wist credit, 
(quoth he) that I might obteine pardon, 1 would discover all that I 
knowe of witchcraft. The which condition being accepted, and 
pardon promised (partlie in hope thereof, and partlie to be rid of his 
wife) he said as followeth. 
The novice or yoong disciple goeth to some church, togither with 
the mistresse of that profession, upon a sundaie morning, before the 
conjuration of holie water, &^ there the said novice renounceth the 
faith, promiseth obedience in observing, or rather omitting of 
ceremonies in meetings, and such other follies ; and finallie, that 
they doo homage to their yoong maister the divell, as they covenanted. 
But this is notable in that storie, that this yoong witch, doubting 
that his wives examination would bewraie his knaverie, told the 
inquisitor; that in truth his wife was guiltie as well as he, but she will 
never, I am sure (quoth he) though she should be burned a thousand 
times, confesse any of these circumstances. 
And this is in no wise to be forgotten, that notwithstanding his 
contrition, his confession, and his accusation of his owne wife (con- 
trarie to the inquisitors / promise and oth) he and his wife were both 39- 
burned at a stake, being the first discoverers of this notable league, 
whereupon the fable of witchcraft is mainteined ; and whereby such 
other confessions have beene from the like persons, since that time, 
extorted and augmented. / 
The fift Chapter. 
Of the private league, a notable tale of Bodins concerning a French 
ladie, with a confutation. 
I 
HE maner of their private league is said to be, when 
the divell invisible, and sometimes visible, in the 
middest of the people talketh with them privatelie; 
promising, that if they will followe his counsell, he 
will supplie all their necessities, and make all their endevors 
prosperous : and so beginneth with small matters : whereunto they 
consent privilie, and come not into the fairies assemblie. 
And in this case (mee thinks) the divell sometimes, in such externall 
or corporall shape, should meete with some that would not consent to 
his motions (except you will sale he knoweth their cogitations) and so 
46. 
The maner of 
witches private 
league with 
the divell.

--- PAGE 134 ---
36 
3- Booke. 
The discoverie 
J. Bod. lib. 2. 
de dcemono- 
7na7iia. cap. 4. 
This agreeth 
not with their 
interpretation, 
that saie, this 
is onlie done 
by vertue of 'ri ' 
the legne ; nor 
yet to them 
that referre it 
unto words ; 
quoth nota. 
40. 
C. Agrippa, 
cap. 51. 
should be bewraied. They also (except they were idiots) would spie 
him, and forsake him for breach of covenants. But these bargaines, 
and these assemblies doo all the writers hereupon mainteine : and 
Bodin confirmeth them with a hundred and odd lies ; among the 
number whereof I will (for diverse causes) recite one. 
There was (saith he) a noble Gentlewoman at Lions, that being in 
bed with a lover of hirs, suddenlie in the night arose up, and lighted 
a candle : which when she had done, she tooke a box of ointment, 
wherewith she annointed her bodie ; and after a few words spoken, 
she was carried awaie. Hir bedfellow seeing the order hereof, lept 
out of his bed, tooke the candle in his hand, and sought for the ladie 
round about the chamber, and in everie corner thereof But though 
he could not find hir, yet did he find hir box of ointment : and being 
desirous to know the vertue thereof, besmeered himselfe therewith, 
even as he perceived hir to have done before. And although he were 
not so superstitious, as to use anie words to helpe him forward in his 
busines, yet by the vertue of that ointment (saith Bodtti) he was 
immediatlie conveied / to Lorreijie, into the assemblie of witches. 
"Which when he sawe, he was abashed, and said ; In the name of 
God, what make I heere? And upon those words the whole assemblie 
vanished awaie, and left him there alone starke naked ; and so was 
he faine to returne to Lions. But he had so good a conscience (for 
you may perceive by the first part of the historic, he was a verie 
honest man) that he accused his true lover for a witch, and caused 
hir to be burned. But as for his adulterie, neither M. Mai. nor Bodin 
doo once so much as speake in the dispraise thereof. 
It appeareth throughout all Bodins booke, that he is sore offended 
with Corneliits Agrippa, and the rather (as I suppose) bicause the 
said C. Agrippa recanted that which Bodi7t mainteineth, who thinketh 
he could worke wonders by magicke, and speciallieby his blacke dog. 
It should seeme he / had prettie skill in the art of divination. For 
though he wrote before Bodin manie a yeare, yet uttereth he these 
words in his booke De vanitate scientiarum : A certeine French 
protonotarie (saith he) a lewd fellow and a coosener, hath written 
a certeine fable or miracle done at Lions, Gr'c. 