rres and bodies, to whome 
these movings male accord, which cannot be seene, either through 
their exceeding highnes, or that hitherto are not tried with anie obser- 
vation of the art. The true motion of Mars is not yet perceived, 
neither is it possible to find out the true entring of the sunne into 
the equinoctiall points. It is not denied, that the astronomers them- 
Z 
The vnine 
and trifling 
trickes of 
figure -ca- 
sters. 
163. 
211. 
Johan. Mon- 
tiregius hi 
epistola ad 
Blanchnne :

--- PAGE 268 ---
u. Bookp. 
The discoverie 
b' Guliel- 
vius de san- 
cto Clodoald. 
Rabbi Levi. 
C. A grip, in 
lib. de vanit. 
scient. 
Archelaus. 
Cassander. 
Eudoxiis, 
selves have received their light, and their vcrie art from poets, with- 
out whose fables the twelve signes and the northerlie and southerlie 
figures had never ascended into heaven. And yet (as C. Agrippa 
saith) astrologers doo live, cousen men, and gaine by these fables ; 
whiles the poets, which are the inventors of them, doo live in 
beggerie. 
The verie skilfullest mathematicians confesse, that it is unnossible 
to find out anie certeine thing concerning the knowledge of judge- 
ments, as well for the innumerable causes which worke togither with 
the heavens, being all togither, and one with the other to be con- 
sidered: as also bicause influencies doo not constraine but incline. 
■ For manie ordinarie and extraordinarie occasions doo interrupt them ; 
as education, custome, place, honestie, birth, bloud, sickness*^, health, 
strength, weakenes, meate, drinke, libertie of mind, learning, &c. And 
they that have written the rules of judgement, and agree neerest 
therein, being of equall authoritie and learning, publish so contrarie 
opinions upon one thing, that it is unpossible for an astrologian to 
pronounce a certeintie upon so variable opinions ; & otherwise, upon 
so uncerteine reports no man is able to judge herein. So as 
(according to Ptolomie) the foreknowledge of things to come by the 
starres, dependeth as well upon the affections of the mind, as upon 
the observation of the planets, proceeding rather from chance than art, 
as whereby they deceive others, and are deceived themselves also./ 
Astrolo- 
gers prog- 
nosticati- 
ons are like 
the answers 
of oracles. 
154. 
The xxii Chapter. 
Tlie subtiltie of astrologers to mainteine the credit of their art, why 
they reniaine in credit, certeine inipieties conteined in astrologers 
assertions. 
F you marke the cunning ones, you shall see them speake 
darkelieof things to come, devising by artificiall subtiltie, 
doubtfull prognostications, easilie to be applied to everie 
thing, time, prince, and nation : and if anie thing come to 
passe according to their divinations, they fortifie their old prognosti- 
cations with new reasons. Nevertheles, in the multitude/ and varietie 
of starres, yea even in the verie middest of them, they find out some 
places in a good aspect, and some in an ill ; and take occasion here- 
upon to sale what they list, promising unto some men honor, long life, 
wealth, victorie, children, marriage, freends, offices ; & finallie everlast- 
ing felicitie. But if with anie they be discontent, they saie the starres 
be not favourable to them, and threaten them with hanging, drowning, 
beggerie, sickenes, misfortune, &:c. And if one of these prognoslica-

--- PAGE 269 ---
of WitcJuraft. 
Chap. 22. 
tions fall out right, then they triumph above measure. If the 
progno3ticators be found to forge and lie alwaies (without such 
fortune as the blind man had in killing the crow) they will excuse the 
matter, saieng, that Sapiens dotnmatur astris, wheras (according to 
Agrippas words) neither the wiseman ruleth the starres, nor the 
starres the wiseman, but God ruleth them both. Corn. Tacitus saith, 
that they are a people disloiall to princes, deceiving them that 
beleeve them. And Varro saith, that the vanitie of all superstitions 
floweth out of the bosome of astrologie. And if our life & fortune 
depend not on the starres, then it is to be granted, that the astrologers 
' seeke where nothing is to be found. But we are so fond, mistrustfuU 
& credulous, that we feare more the fables of Robin good fellow ; as- 
trologers, & witches, & beleeve more the things that are not, than the 
things that are. And the more unpossible a thing is, the more we stand 
in feare thereof ; and the lesse likelie to be true, the more/ we beleeve it. 
And if we were not such, I thinke with Cornelius Agrippa, that these 
divinors, astrologers, conjurors, and cousenors would die for hunger. 
And our foolish light beleefe, forgetting things past, neglecting 
things present, and verie hastie to know things to come, doth so 
comfort and mainteine these cousenors ; that whereas in other men, 
for making one lie, the faith of him that speaketh is so much mis- 
trusted, that all the residue being true is not regarded. Contrariwise, 
in these cousenages among our divinors, one truth spoken by hap 
giveth such credit to all their lies, that ever after we beleeve whatso- 
ever they sale ; how incredible, impossible or false soever it be. Sir 
Thomas Moore saith, they know not who are in their owne chambers, 
neither who maketh themselves cuckoldes that take upon them all this 
cunning, knowledge, and great foresight. But to enlarge their credit, 
or rather to manifest their impudencie, they saie the gift of prophesie, 
the force of religion, the secrets of conscience, the power of divels, 
the vertue of miracles, the efficacie of praiers, the state of the life to 
come, &c : doth onlie depend upon the starres, and is given and knowne 
by them alone. For they saie, that when the signe of Gemini is 
ascended, and Saturne and Mercurie be joined in Aquarie, in the 
ninth h ouse of the heavens, there is a prophet borne : and therefore 
that Christ had so manie vertues, bicause he had in that place Saturne 
and Gemini. Yea these Astrologers doo not sticke to saie, that the 
starres distribute all sortes of religions : wherein Jupiter is the especiall 
patrone, who being joined with Saturne, maketh the religion of the 
Jewes; with Mercurie, of the Christians; with the Moone, of Anti- 
christianitie. Yea they affirme that the faith of everie man male be 
knowne to them as well as to God. And that Christ himselfe did use 
the election of houres in his miracles; so as the Jewes could not hurt 
213. 
S. Thomas 
M cores 
frumpe at 
judiciall 
astrologers. 
Astrologi- 
call blas- 
phemies

--- PAGE 270 ---
II. Booke. 
The discoverie 
[* read, he. J 
Joh II 8. 
& 9. 
214. 155. 
The follie 
ol our ge- 
nethliaks, 
or nativiti- 
casiers. 
Senec. lib. dt- 
quast. na- 
tural. 4. 
213. 
Hilariui 
Pirkmair // 
arte apode- 
Plica. 
liim whilest he went to Jerusalem., and therefore that *tlie said to his 
disciples that forbad him to go; Are there not twelve houres in the 
daie ?/ 
The xxiii. Chapter. 
Who luive poiver to drive awaie dive Is with their onelie presence, 
who shall receive of God whatsoever they aske in praier, who shall 
obteine everlasting life by vieanes of constellations, as nativitie- 
casters affir/ne. 
HEY saie also, that he which hath Mars happilie placed 
in the ninth house of the heavens, shall have power to 
drive awaie divels with his onelie presence from them 
that be possessed. And he that shall praie to God, when 
he findeth the Moone and Jupiter ']o\ne6. with the dragons head in the 
middest of the heavens, shall obteine whatsoever he asketh: and that 
Jupiter and Saturne doo give blessednes of the life to come. But if 
anie in his nativitie shall have Saturne happilie placed in Leone, his 
soule shall have everlasting life. And hereunto subscribe Peter de 
Appona, Roger Bacon, Guido Bonatus, Arnold de villa nova, and the 
Cardinall of Alia. Furthermore, the providence of God is denied, 
and the miracles of Christ are diminished, when these powers of the 
heavens and their influencies are in such sort advanced. Moses, 
Esaic, Job a.r\d Jeremie, steme lo dislike and reject it: and at 
in times past it was banished, and by Justiniaji condemmed under 
paine of death. Finallie, Seneca derideth these soothsaieng witches 
in this sort; Amongst the Cleones (saith he) there was a custome, that 
the x"^('^o(pt''^ah-e^ (which were gazers in the aier, watching when a 
storme of haile should fall) when they sawe by anie cloud that the 
shower was imminent and at hand; the use was (I saie) bicause of the 
hurt wliich it might doo to their vines, &c: diligentlie to warne the 
people thereof ; who used not to provide clokes or anie such 
defense against it, but provided sacrifices; the rich, cockes and 
white lambes ; the poore would spoile themselves by cutting their 
thombes ; as though ( saith he) that little bloud could ascend up 
to the cloudes, and doo anie good there for their releefe in this/ 
matter. 
And here by the waie, 1 will impart unto you a Venetian supersti- 
tion, of great antiquitie, and at this daie (for ought I can read to the 
contrarie) in use. It is written, that everie yeere ordinarilie upon 
ascension daie, the Duke of Venice, accompanied with the States, 
goeth with great solemnitie unto the sea, and after ctrteine ceremonies 
ended, casteth thereinto a gold ring of great value and estimation for

--- PAGE 271 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 2?. 1 73 
a pacificatorie oblation : wherewithal! their predecessors supposed 
that the wrath of the sea was asswaged. By this action, as a late 
writer saith, they doo Despo7isai-e sibi mare, that is, espouse the sea Joannes Gar- 
unto themselves, &c. ^ Hy- 
Let us therefore, according to the prophets advise, aske raine t^''^^^ ^ 
of the Lord in the houres of the latter time, and he shall verse 2. 
send white cloudes, and give us raine &c : for surelie, 
the idols (as the same prophet saith) have spoken 
vanitie, the soothsaiers have seene a lie, and 
the dreamers have told a vaine thing. 
They comfort in vaine, and therefore 
they went awaie like sheepe, &c. 
If anie sheepebiter or witch- 
monger will follow them, 
they shall go alone 
for me.//

--- PAGE 272 ---
T 74 I-'. Bonke. The discoverie 
2/6. 156. 
Psal. 58. 
Psal. 58. 4. 5. 
Virgil, in 
Davione. 
By Ai. Flc- 2iy. 
niing. 
Prover. 18. 
Chron. 30. 
Psal. 10. 
Psal. 51. 
Psal. 139 
Jeiem. 32. 
Isai. 6. 
Isai. 50. 
Exod. 7. 8. 9. 
Prov. 16. 
\ The twelfe Booke. 
The first Chapter. 
The Hebrue word Habar expon7ided, where also the supposed secret 
force of charines and mcha7itme7its is shewed, a>id the efficacie of 
words is diverse waies declared. 
HIS Hebrue word Habar, being in Greeke Epathin, and 
in Latine Iticaiitarc, is in English, To inchant, or (if you 
had rather have it so) to bewitch. In these inchant- 
ments, certeine wordes, verses, or charmes, &c : are 
secrethe uttered, wherein there is thought to be miraculous efficacie. 
There is great varietie hereof : but whether it be by charmes, voices, 
images, characters, stones, plants, metals, herbes, &c : there must 
herewithall a speciall forme of words be alwaies used, either divine, 
diabolical!, insensible, or papisticall, whereupon all the vertue of the 
worke is supposed to depend. This word is speciallie used in the 58. 
psalme, which place though it be taken up for mine adversaries 
strongest argument against me ; yet me thmkes it maketh so with 
me, as they can never be able to answer it. -For there it plainelie 
appeareth, that the adder heareth not the voice of the charmer, 
charme he never so cunninglie : contrarie to the poets fabling, 
Frigidus in pratis cantando ricinpitur atiguis.l 
The coldish stiake in niedo wes g7'eene, 
With char77ies is burst i/i peeces clee7ie. 
But hereof more shall be said hereafter in due place. 
I grant that words sometimes have singular vertue and efficacie, 
either in persuasion or disuasion, as also diverse other waies ; so as 
thereby some are converted from the waie of perdition, to the 
estate of salvation : and so contrariwise, according to the 
saieng of Solomo7i ; Death and life are in the instru- 
ment of the toong : but even therein God worketh 
all in all, as well in framing the heart of 
the one, as in directing the toong of 
the other : as appeareth in 
manie places of the holie 
scriptures.

--- PAGE 273 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 2. 175 
The second Chapter. 
What is forbidden in scriptures concerning witchcraft, of the opera- 
tiofi of words, the superstition of the Cabalists and papists, who 
createth substances, to imitate God in some cases is presumption, 
words of sanctif cation. 
[hat which is forbidden in the scriptures touching in- 
chantment or witch craft, is not the wonderful! working 
with words. For where/ words have had miraculous 157- 
operation, there hath beene alwaies the speciall provi- 
dence, power and grace of God uttered to the strengthening of the 
faith of Gods people, and to the furtherance of the gospell : as when Acts. 5. 
the apostle with a word slue Ananias and Saphira. But the propha- 
nation of Gods name, the seducing, abusing, and cousening of the 
people, and mans presumption is hereby prohibited, as whereby manie 
take upon them after the recitall of such names, as God in the 
scripture seemeth to appropriate to himselfe, to foreshew things to 
come, to worke miracles, to delect fellonies, &c : as the Cabalists in 
times past tooke upon them, by the ten names of God, and his angels, 
expressed / in the scriptures, to worke woonders : and as the papists 21S. 
at this daie by the like names, by crosses, by gospels hanged about 
their necks, by masses, by exorcismes, by holie water, and a thousand 
consecrated or rather execrated things, promise unto themselves and 
others, both health of bodie and soule. 
But as herein we are not to imitate the papists, so in such things, 
as are the peculiar actions of God, we ought not to take upon us to Jnnas. i. 
counterfet, or resemble him, which with his word created all things. 
For we, neither all the conjurors, Cabalists, papists, soothsaiers, 
inchanters, witches, nor charmers in the world, neither anie other 
humane or yet diabolicall cunning can adde anie such strength to 
Gods workmanship, as to make anie thing anew, or else to exchange 
one thing into another. New qualities may be added by humane art, 
but no new substance can be made or created by man. And seeing 
that art faileth herein, doubtles neither the illusions of divels, nor 
the cunning ok witches, can bring anie such thing truelie to passe. 
For by the sound of the words nothing commeth, nothing goeth, other- 
wise than God in nature hath ordeined to be doone by ordinarie 
speech, or else by his speciall ordinance. Indeed words of sanctifica- Words of 
tion are necessarie and commendable, according to S. Paules rule ; ifo"n'and 
Let your meat be sanctified with the word of God, and by praier. But whtrem 
... 1 J I they con- 
sanctification dooth not here signine either change of substance of the sist.

--- PAGE 274 ---
12 Booke. 
TAe discoverie 
meate, or the adding of anie new strength thereunto ; but it is sanc- 
tified, in that it is received with thanksgiving and praier ; that our 
bodies may be refreshed, and our soule thereby made the apter to 
glorifie God. 
The third Chapter. 
An ample 
description 
of women 
commonlie 
called wit- 
ches. 
What effect and offoise witches charmes bring, how unapt witches 
are, and how lailikelie to worke those things which they are 
thought to doo, tvhat would foUowe if those things were true which 
are laid to their charge. 
2ig 
158. 
HE words and other the illusions of witches, charmers, 
and conjurors, though they be not such in opera- 
tion and effect, as they are commonHe taken to be : 
yet they are offensive to the majestic/ and name of 
God, obscuring the truth of divinitie, & also of philosophic. For 
if God onlie give life & being to all creatures, who can put any 
such ver/tue or livelie feeling into a body of gold, silver, bread, or 
wax, as is imagined.? If either preests, divels, or witches could so 
doo, the divine power shuld be checked & outfaced by magicall 
cunning, & Gods creatures made servile to a witches pleasure. What 
is not to be brought to passe by these incantations, if that be true 
which is attributed to witches? & yet they are women that never went 
to schorile in their lives, nor had any teachers : and therefore without 
art or learning; poore, and therefore not able to make any provision 
of metal or stones, &c : whereby to bring to passe strange matters, by 
naturall magicke ; old and stiffe, and therefore not nimble handed to 
deceive your eie with legierdemaine ; heavie, and commonlie lame, 
and therefore unapt to flie in the aire, or to danse with the fairies ; 
sad, melancholike, sullen, and miserable, and therefore it should be 
unto them {Invita Minerva) to banket or danse with Minerva; or 
yet with Herodias, as the common opinion of all writers heerein is. 
On the other side, we see they are so malicious and spitefull, that if they 
by themselves, or by their divels, could trouble the elements, we should 
never have faire weather. If they could kill men, children, or cattell, 
they would spare none ; but would destroy and kill whole countries 
and housholds. If they could transfer come (as is affirmed) from 
their neighbors field into their owne, none of them would be poore, 
none other should be rich. If they could transforme themselves and 
others (as it is most constantlie affirmed) oh what a number of apes 
and owles should there be of us ! If Incubus could beget Merlins 
among us, we should have ajoUie manie of cold prophets./

--- PAGE 275 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 
The fourth Chapter. 
Why God forbad the practise of witchcraft, the absiirditie of the 
lawe of the twelve tables, whereupon their estimation i?t miracu- 
loits actions is grotinded, of their woonderous works. 
HOUGH it be apparent, that the Holie-ghost forbiddeth 
this art, bicause of the abuse of the name of God, and the 
cousenage comprehended therein : yet I confesse, the cus- 
tomes and lawes almost of all nations doo declai'e, that all 
these miraculous works, before by me cited, and many other things 
more woonderfull, were attributed to the power of witches. The which 
lawes, with the executions and judicials thereupon, and the witches 
confessions, have beguiled almost the whole world. What absurdities 
concerning witchcraft, are written in the law of the twelve tables, 
which was the highest and most ancient law of the Romans ? Where- 
upon the strongest argument of witches omnipotent power is 
framed ; as that the wisedome of such lawgivers could not be abused. 
Whereof (me thinks) might be made a more strong argument on our 
side ; to wit. If the cheefe and principall lawes of the world be in this 
case ridiculous, vaine, false, incredible, yea and contrarie to Gods 
lawe ; the residue of the lawes and arguments to that effect, are to 
be suspected. If that argument should hold, it might proove all 
the popish lawes against protestants, & the hea/the"nish princes lawes 
against christians, to be good and in force : for it is like they would 
not have made them, except they had beene good. Were it not 
(thinke you) a strange proclamation, that no man (upon paine of 
death) should pull the moone out of heaven.' And yet verie many of 
the most learned witchmongers make their arguments upon weaker 
grounds; as namelie in this forme and maner; We find in poets, 
that witches wrought such and such miracles ; Ergo they can accom- 
plish and doo this or that wonder. The words of the lawe are these;/ 
Qui frieges incantasset p(r7ias dato, Neve alienant segetem pellexeris 
excajitando, neqj incatitando, Ne agrum defriiganto : the sense 
wherof in English is this ; Let him be executed that 
bewitcheth corne, Transferre not other mens 
corne into thy ground by inchantment, 
Take heede thou inchant not at all 
neither make thy neighbors 
field barren : he that dooth 
these things shall 
die, &c. 
A A 
220. 
A common 
and uni- 
versal! er- 
ror. 
159. 
J. Bodinus. 
Danwus. 
Hyperius. 
Heming. 
Bur. Spineus^ 
Mai. Male/. 
* Spinalis. 
221.

--- PAGE 276 ---
178 
1 2. Booke.' 
T/ie discoverte 
The fift Chapter. 
A notable 
purgation 
of C. F. C. 
cunvented 
for a witch. 
Mai- male/, 
far. 2. qua. i. 
cap. 5. 
[* moushoalll 
160. 
Ah itislance of one ar reigned upon the lawe of the twelve tables, 
ivhereby the said lawe is proved ridiculous, of two witches that 
could doo woonders. 
LTHOUGH among us, we thinke them bewitched that 
wax suddenlie poore, and not them that growe hastihe rich ; 
yet at Rome you shall understand, that (as Plinie reporteth) 
upon these articles one C. Fttrius Cressus was convented 
before Spurius Albinus ; for that he being but a little while free, and 
delivered from bondage, occupieng onelie tillage ; grew rich on the 
sudden, as having good crops : so as it was suspected that he transferred 
his neighbors corne into his fields. None intercession, no delaie, 
none excuse, no deniall would serve, neither in jest nor derision, nor 
yet through sober or honest meanes : but he was assigned a peremp- 
torie dale, to answer for life. And therefore fearing the sentence of 
condemnation, which was to be given there, by the voice and verdict 
of three men (as we heere are tried by twelve) made his appearance 
at the daie assigned, and brought with him his ploughs and harrowes, 
spades and shovels, and other instruments of husbandrie, his oxen, 
horsses, and working bullocks, his servants, and also his daughter, 
which was a sturdie wench and a good huswife, and also (as Piso 
reporteth) well trimmed up in apparell, and said to the whole bench 
in this wise ; Lo heere my lords I make mine appearance, according 
to my promise and your pleasures, presenting unto you my charmes 
and witchcrafts, which have so inriched me. As for the labour, sweat, 
wat/ching, care, and diligence, which I have used in this behalfe, I 
cannot shew you them at this time. And by this meanes he was dis- 
missed by the consent of that court, who otherwise (as it was thought) 
should hardly have escaped the sentence of condemnation, and 
punishment of death. 
It is constantlie affirmed in M. Mai. that Stafus used alwaies to 
hide himselfe in a *monshoall, and had a disciple called Hoppo, who 
made Stadlin a maister witch, and could all when they list invisiblie 
transferre the third part of their neighbours doong, hay, corne, &c : into 
theire owne ground, make/ haile, tempests, and flouds, with thunder 
and lightning; and kill children, cattell, &c : reveale things hidden, 
and many other tricks, when and where they list. But these two 
shifted not so well with the inquisitors, as the other with the Romaiic 
and heathen judges. Howbeit, Stafits was loo hard for them all :

--- PAGE 277 ---
of Witchcraft. cimp. e. 179 
for none of all the lawieis nor inquisitors could bring him to 
appeere before them, if it be true that witchmongers write in these 
matters. 
The sixt Chapter. 
Lawes provided for the punishment of such witches as worke 
miracles, whereof some are mentioned, and of certeine popish 
lawes published against them. 
HERE are other lawes of other nations made to this in- 
credible effect : as Lex Salicarum provideth punishment 
for them that flie in the aire from place to place, and 
meete at their nightlie assemblies, and brave bankets, car- 
rieng with them plate, and such stuffe, &c : even as we should make 
a lawe to hang him that should take a church in his hand at Dover, 
and throwe it to Callice. And bicause in this case also popish lawes 
shall be seene to be as foolish and lewd as any other whatsoever, and 
speciallie as tyrannous as that which is most cruell: you shall heare 
what trim new lawes the church of Rome hath latelie devised. These 
are therefore the words of pope Innoce7tt the eight to the inquisitors/ 
of Ahnanie, and of pope fulius the second, sent to the inquisitors of 
Berg07nen. It is come to our eares, that manie lewd persons, of both 
kinds, as well male as female, using the companie of the divels 
Incubus and Succubus, with incantations, charmes, conjurations, &c : 
doo destroie, &c : the births of women with child, the yoong of all 
cattell, the corne of the feeld, the grapes of the vines, the frute of the 
trees : Item, men, women, and all kind of cattell and beasts of the 
feeld : and with their said inchantments, &c : doo utterlie extinguish, 
suffocate, and spoile all vineyards, ortchards, medowes, pastures, 
grasse, greene corne, and ripe corne, and all other podware : yea men 
and women themselves are by their imprecations so afflicted with 
externall and inward paines and diseases, that men cannot beeget, 
nor women bring foorth anie children, nor yet accomplish the dutie of 
wedlocke, denieng the faith which they in baptisme professed, to the 
destruction of their owne soules, &c. Our pleasure therefore is, 
that all impediments that male hinder the inquisitors of