ee note on Deumus. 
P. 523. " Raise thunder . . . Elicius", i, 6, § 6, but in the enumera- 
tion of the "Z?/z selecti" Wier and Ennius are not followed, but 
Varro. 
P. 525. "As namelie of beasts . . . Latus'\ is, I believe, from Strabo 
originally, but by Scot was taken, I think, from Wier i, 6, § 2. 
P. 533. "Pope Benedict the eight and ninth", i, 16, § 3 and 4. But 
Scot's " seen a hundred years after", whereas Wier only has " postea", 
seems to show that the former had referred to Platina.

--- PAGE 657 ---
Extracts from Wier. 
559 
II. 
SCOT ON THE NAMES, ETC, OF DEVILS FROM WIER, 
BUT PROBABLY THROUGH T. R., MENTIONED F. jgj. 
P. 377, 1. 13. " Seventie and nine." The list given by Scot is 68 + 
I accidentally omitted + Beelzebub not mentioned + the 4 kings of 
the N., S., E. and West = 74. Wier himself gives no total, but the 
discrepancy in Scot may perhaps have arisen from his copying 79 
from T. R., from whom, as an intermediary, and not directly from 
Wier, or from some other, I think, from facts presently to be men- 
tioned, it will be rendered probable that he copied. 
P. 378. "Mardas." After this name Scot omits from Wier's list — 
" Purtlas, alibi invenitur Busas, magnus Princeps & Dux est, cujus 
mansio circa turrim Babylonis, & videtur in eo flamma foris, caput 
autem assimilatur magno nycto-coraci. Autor est et promotor dis- 
cordiarum, bellorum, rixarum et mendaciorum. Omnibus in locis non 
intromittatur. Ad quEesita respondet abunde. Sub sunt huic legiones 
vingenti sex, partim ex ordine Throni, partim Angelorum." The edi- 
tion of Wier that I have used, I may here remark, is chiefly that of 
1660, but where any doubt arose, that of 1583. But from whence did 
Wier obtain these things? Under Bslial (I give Scot's English) he 
says : " Without doubt (I must confesse) I learned this of my master 
Salomon ; but he told me not why he gathered them together, and 
shut them up so. But I beleeve it was for the pride of this Beliall." 
Secondly, under Gaap, he says: "I may not bewraie how and declare 
the meanes to conteine him, bicause it is abhomination [nefandam], 
and for that I have learned nothing from Salomon of his dignitie and 
office". And Wier has in his margin "Scelerati necromantici verba 
sunt". Thirdly, W'ier, in his address before his Pseudomonarchia, says: 
"banc . . . ex Acharonticorum Vasallorum archivo subtractam"; and 
at the close of this address : " Inscribitur vero a maleferiato hoc 
hominum genere Officium spirituum, vel. Liber officiorum spirituum, 
seu Liber dictus Empto.[rium] Salomonis, de principibus & regibus 
djemoniorum, qui cogi possunt divina vertute & humana. At mihi 
nuncupabitur Pseudomonarchia Dsmonum." 
Pp- 377-93- Scot, in these second, third, and fourth chapters, follows 
Wier, but for these reasons did not, I think, directly translate him: 
1. As stated under Marbas, p. 378, Picrflas is omitted. 
2. Three sentences are retained in their original Latin, as though 
the translator could not understand them, {a) Under Barbatos, ". . . 
in signo sagittarii sylvestris", he probably knowing Sagittarius, but not 
sure as to what sign or who Sagittarius sylvestris might be. (b) Under 
Leraie, ". . . quos optimos objicit tribus diebus''. Wier here places 
" optimos" as the third word, but the sense to me and my friends is 
an unsolved puzzle, {c) Under Oze, ". . . Duratque id regnum ad 
horam" (but Wier omits the "ad"), "And this sovereignty lasts 
an hour [and no longer], differing in this from ordinary mono-

--- PAGE 658 ---
56o 
Extracts from Wier. 
mania." 3. Under Bileth Scot and Wier say, ". . . as for Amai- 
jnon^\ and Scot in the margin has "Vide Amaimon"; yet neither 
mentions him under a heading, nor more than by name, as " Amay- 
mon king of the East", in chap. iv. 4. Under Mitrimcr, Scot ends 
with " and ruleth thirtie legions", but Wier omits this, as do both 
in the cases of Oze, Vine, and Saleos. 5. There are differences and 
slips of translation which Scot could not, I think, have made, 
(a) Scot invariably, in the rest of his works, speaks of "the order 
of virtutes", but in this chapter, where it is used five times under 
Agares, Barbatos, Purson, and Belial, and ch. iv, p. 395, it is " vertues". 
{b) Barbatos is said to come " with foure kings, which bring com- 
panies and great troopes". But Wier has "cum quatuor regibus tubas 
ferentibus". From this it is clear that the translator read "tubas" as 
"tribus". (c) "Ugly viper" is the translation of "viperse species deter- 
rima". {d) " He giveth answers of things present, past, and to come", 
is in Wier " Dat perfecte responsa vera de . . . futuris & abstrusis"; 
Scot omitting both "perfecte" and "abstrusis". See under ^^'^'/i- for both 
(^r) and {(i). (e) "Bime Muta loquitur voce", rendered in Scot, " he 
speaketh with a divine voice". The translator apparently looked out for 
"mutus" in a dictionary, such as Th. Cooper's, where in Old English 
he found "dumme", and read it— as I at first sight did, and with great 
astonishment, though I confess my thoughts were running on the 
puzzle — "divine". {/) \J nder Bilel/i, ". . . before whome go trumpets 
and all kind of melodious musicke", Scot has, " or if he have not the 
chaine of spirits [the book called Vinculum Spirituuin\, certeinelie he 
will never feare nor regard him after", but Wier has, "... sciet baud 
dubie exorcista, malignos spiritus postea eum non verituros, et semper 
viliorem habituros". {.g) " Sitri . . . willinglie deteineth secrets of 
women", is in Wier, " secreta libenter detegit f^minarum". Here there 
are in the English two gross blunders, as is evident on reading the 
rest of the Latin text. " Ludificansque", also, is not " mocking", but 
"toying with them", "ut se luxuriose nudent". (//) Under/'a/;«£'«,Wier's 
"in Empto.[rium] Salomonis" is "in Circulo Salomojiis^'. "Aquilonem" 
is " North-west", though Th. Cooper and Holyokes Rider, and, I 
believe, all dictionaries, only give it and its adjectives as North, 
North-east, and Northern. "Accedant", also, is translated "may be 
reckoned", to the complete extinction of the sense, (z) Belial is, 
" eorum qui ex Ordine [Potestatum] ceciderunt", and is translated, " of 
them which fell being of the orders". (7) " He is found in the forme 
of ; -a exorcist in the bonds of spirits", is, in more ways than one, a 
strange and most ambiguous rendering, altogether unlike Scot, of 
"Forma exorcistse [the form of exorcising that is tobe used] invenitur in 
[the book] Vinculo Spiritimni\ {k) " Si autem se submittere noluerit 
Vinculum Spirituum legatur, quo sapientissimus Salomon",etc., becomes 
" If . . . let the bond of spirits be read, the spirits chaine [appar- 
ently an unintentional doubling of the previous words], is sent for him 
wherewith wise Salomon", etc. I might add that twice in the course 
of this chapter " sapientissimus S." becomes "wise S.", in " vase vitreo' 
" in a brazen vessel", and "in puteum grandem" " into a deep lake or 
hole", and twice afterwards " lake" only. (/) Under Furfur, "fulgura,

--- PAGE 659 ---
Extracts from Wier. 
561 
coruscationes & tonitrua" is translated "thunders and lightnings, 
and blasts". In Malphas, "artifices maximos" is "artificers". («) 
Under Vepar, "Contra inimicos exorcistae per dies tres . . . homines 
inficit" becomes, without qualification, " he killeth men in three days", 
(f ) Under Sydonay, " Cum hujus ofiicia exercet exorcista", instead of 
"When the exorcist would make use of the offices [the incantations 
for] of this [spirit]", or " When the exorcist would make use of the 
forms of invocation proper to this spirit", it is translated, " When the 
conjurer exerciseth this office". The next words, " fit [? sit] fortis", be- 
come "let him be abroad", "foris" having been read instead of "fortis". 
" If his cap be on his head", Wier has " si coopertus", " if he be over- 
whelmed" [with fear, etc.], the translator possibly wishing to express 
this by "if his cap be so far on his head" [through fear as to cover his 
eyes], then, etc. Besides this, there is an ambiguity in Wier which is 
fully followed in the translator. In Wier we have : " si vero coopertus 
fuerit, ut in omnibus detegatur, efficiet: Quod si non fecerit exorcista, 
ab Amaymone in cunctis decipietur :" I can only suppose from the 
punctuation that the "Quod si non", etc.,was intended to refer to his not 
being "fortis", and (as in Scot) "warie and standing on his feete". {p) 
Under Gaap, Scot says, "if anie exorcist . . . nor see him"; Wier has 
the same, but follows it up with "nisi per artem". On the other hand, 
Wier has no equivalent for "insensibility'', (r) Shax : ". . . there 
he speaketh divinely" is " loquitur de divinis rebus", an error Scot 
could not have made, and which is not made elsewhere in this chapter, 
(j) Procell : " . . . in the shape of an angell, but speaketh darkly of 
things hidden", is in Wier, " in specie angelica, sed obscura valde : 
loquitur de occultis". {() Rau7n : ". . . he stealeth wonderfully out of 
the kings house"; Wier, "mire ex regis domi vel alia suffuratur". {v) 
In Vine, "lapideos domos" is translated "stone walles". iw) Flauros: 
Wier says,"vere respondet. Si fuerit in triangulo mentitur in cunctis." 
Scot follows the same punctuation, but had he translated it,he,as a man 
of intelligence, must have seen that the (.) before "Si" should have been 
struck out and placed after "triangulo", or a "non" inserted after "Si", for 
this triangle was made specially for the exorcist's safety and the spirit's 
obedience and truthful speaking (see under Bi/el/t, Fur/iir and S/i ax). 
It must, however, be confessed to be a mark of haste in Scot to have 
admitted such mistakes, even though he only copied, the more so as 
he must have known the Pseudomotiarchia. "And deceiveth in other 
things, and beguileth in other business", is a duplicate translation of 
"et fallit in aliis negotiis". The omission of "tvventie" (viginti) before 
"legions" may be a press error, but the "de divinitate", translated "of 
divinity'', must be, I think, a translator's error, for it really means "of 
the Divinity" (see " Purson"). ix) \]ndex Buer, Wier has "conspicitur 
in signo*"; under Decarabia, "venit simili*"; under Aym, " altero 
[capiti, simili] homini duos * habenti." Clearly the book or MS. used 
by Wier was in these places illegible, or more likely the copier had been 
unable to fill in the wanting word or words, and indicated this by a*. 
But Scot's authority did not understand it on its first occurrence 
under Buer, and, not mentioning any sign, translates it, " is seene in 
this sign;"! (jc) The names of the fiends differ also sometimes in 
4C

--- PAGE 660 ---
562 
Extracts from Wier. 
spelling; omitting such instances as "i" for "y", "c" for "k", etc., I give 
Wier first, followed by Scot's form. "Bathym", alibi " Marthim" — 
" Bathin", "Mathin"; " Pursan" — "Pui'son"; "Loray" — "Leraie", this 
latter being wrong, because his alias is "Oray". Wier, by the way, also 
shows that "Leraie" was not pronounced "Leraje", as given in the 
second edition of Scot. " Ipes", alias "Ayperos" — " Ipos", "Ayporos"; 
"Naberus" — "Naberius", probably the wrong form; "Roneve" — "Ro- 
nove"; "Forres" — "Foras"; "Marchocias" — " Marchosias"; "Chax" — 
"Shax"; "Pucel"— "Procell"; "Zagam"— "Zagan"; " Volac"— " Valac"; 
"Androalphus" — "Andrealphus"; " Oze" — "Ose"; " Zaleos" — "Saleos"; 
" Wal, 1660", is " Vual (as Scot), 1583". It will be noticed that "e" is 
five times used for "o", a MS. copyist's error. 
I think I had some other proofs in a MS. sheet since lost; but these 
are now overmany to prove that Scot had access to some other copy 
than Wier's Pseudouionarcliia, and made use of it, and that his trans- 
lator was not very conversant with Latm. Wier, it may be added, 
puts " Secretum . . . horum" in one line, and without a capital to the 
"Tu", and gives no explanation of the words in any way, and Scot con- 
firms our conclusion from these facts by the marginal, " This was | 
the work of | one T. R." | etc., and the words " written [&c.] vpo 
parchment" seem to show that this 1570 translation was in MS. 
(See also General Notings, p. 418.) 
P. 379. ^'■EligorP I do not understand the double titles here and 
elsewhere given, nor M'hy "miles" should here be translated "a knight", 
while under Zepar^ Furcas, Miirmiir^ and Allocer it is ''soldier". In 
chapter iii, p. 393, is given the time when knights (" Milites", Wier) 
may be bound, but nothing, of course, is said of " soldiers". 
P. 383. " Tocz.", like a contraction, but Wier has " Tocz" without 
any stop. 
P. 384. "Astarothy Scot, merely copying, is not responsible for her 
being a male. At p. 519 and p. 525, he writing, calls Astarte a "she 
idoll". 
P. 389. '■^ Valac . . . with angels wings like a boie", cannot, I think, 
be Scot's translation of " uti puer alis angeli". 
 " Go»ioryP Wier says " ducali corona", but the rest is the 
same; and it must be remembered that a fiend (as in Incubus and Suc- 
ciibus) could be of either sex. 
P. 390. '■'■Aym ... a light firebrand." Here (as elsewhere in Scot) 
we find, as was then often done, the past of verbs ending in t or d 
elided the ed, or, rather, coalesced them. Wier has " ingentem 
facem ardentem".' 
P. 391. '■''Flatiros . . . if he be commanded." Wier adds "virtute 
numinis". 
P. 392. " Note that a le^iojt." Wier simply has "Legio 6666". The 
rest is, in all probability, Scot's own. 
P. 393. "Ch. 3" is "§ 69" of Wier. 
 "Ch. 4" is " Citatio Praedictorum Spirituum", and though 
not marked as a new chapter, is one having § i, § 2, etc. 
 These are the variations between Wier and Scot in this 
chapter 4, or Citatio, Wier being in Latin, Scot in English, {a) " For

--- PAGE 661 ---
Extracts from VVier. 
563 
one [companion] must always be with you"; "si prcesto fuerit". {b) 
394,"effect"; Wier adds," imo tu£e animte perditione". {c) "And note", 
etc., is Scot's own. {d) The before "hohe trinitie" is in Scot only. 
{e) Scot omits ^ after "holie crosse". (/) Wier's "anathi Enathiel" is 
in Scot " Anathiel". {j^) The " Heli, Messias", after "Gayes" in Scot, are 
in Wier at the end of the list. {Ji) Scot's "Tolimi" is Wier's "Tolima". 
{i) [Second list of names.] Scot's "Horta" is Wier's "hortan"; his " Vege 
dora", "vigedora", Wier's letters, in 1583, being several of them so 
separated that they could easily be read as two words ; Scot's "Ysesy" 
is "ysyesy". (/) [Third list.] Scot's " Elhrac" is Wier's " Elhroc"; 
Ebanher", "eban her", {k) P. 666, Scot's " Cryon" is " irion"; "Sabboth" 
is, as before, more rightly "sabaoth". And I may add that while every 
word in Scot is capitalised e.Kcept "dora", really the sequel of "Vige", 
only "Deus Sabaoth", "A" and "n", "Rex", "Joth", "Aglanabrath", 
"El" "Enathiel", "Amazim", "Elias", and "Messias" of the first list, 
none of the second list, " Elhroch" the first of the third list, and 
none of the fourth list are capitalised. 
P. 395. "As is conteined in the booke called", etc. This ambiguous 
sentence is better explained by Wier's " Continua ut in libro * Annuli 
Salomonis continetur", that is, continue the " etc." as etc. It may 
be added that the *, the mark of an omission, is omitted in the 
English. 
 Scot his authority) wholly omits Wier's final § 5 : 
" Hsec blasphema & execranda hujus mundi fa;x & sentina poenam 
in magos prophanos bene constitutam, pro scelerato mentis ausu jure 
meretur." Scot, 1 think, would be unlikely not to translate this, or be 
incited b)' it to write something similar, but it would be wholly 
against the purport of T. R. Some of the differences entered into, 
both just above and previously, seem to favour the belief that two 
independent copies of the Einpto. Salomonis were used, but very 
many merely show carelessness, and possibly no great amount of 
Latin. The giving of the name " Secretum secretorum", etc., at the 
same place, viz., just at the end of the enumeration, etc., of the prin- 
cipal devils, might seem to favour a copying from Wier; but we must 
remember that the Empto. Salomonis from which these leaves are 
copied may itself, and possibly by way of proving its genuineness, have 
copied these details from an earlier, or supposedly earlier, " Secretum 
secretorum". 
Additions to Part I, p. 558. 
Wier, i, 7, § 10. " Similiter ex parte postica & uteri collo novit 
implicatos crines, arense copiam, clavos ferreos, ligna, vitra confracta, 
stupam, lapides, ossa, et similia prsestigiis movere, offuscata interim 
oculorum acie : insecta auribus furtive immittere, qu^ postea vel pro- 
deant, vel evolent." See also iv, c. 7, § 1-4. Cf. Scot, p. 132. In all 
probability a mere coincidence of thought. 
Wier, iv, c. 11, § 8. "In lacte tres sunt substantise commixtae, 
nimirum butyrum, caseus & serum." Cf. Scot, p. 281, copied verbatim.

--- PAGE 662 ---
GENERAL NOTINGS ON SCOT'S TEXT. 
For words not given here see Glossary. 
P. 2. " Ring bells." Still done in Switzerland, and, I think, else- 
where. 
P. lo. "As Merlin^' Cf. p. 72. 
P. 14. " That cause . . . taken away." The mediasval Latin say- 
ing, " ablata causa tollitur effectus". Repeated p. 319. 
P. 17. " W. W. 1582." [In his preface.] A proof that witches were 
not then burnt in England; but it shows how the question of witch- 
craft was then exercising the people that Ade Davie, the wife of a 
husbandman, pp. 55-7, thought that she was to be burnt. W. W. says 
also that Mr. Justice Darcie, persuading Eliz. Bennett to confess, 
said : " As thou wilt have favour confesse the truth. For so it is, 
there is a man of great learning and knowledge come over lately into 
our Oueenes Majestie, which hath advertised her what a companie 
and numbers of Witches be within Englande: whereupon I and other 
of her Justices have received Commission for the apprehending of as 
many as are within these limites, and they which doe confesse the 
truth of their doeings, they shall have much favour : but the other 
they shall be burnt and hanged" (B. 6). She and others that con- 
fessed had the favour of being hanged like the rest; possibly they had 
the additional favour of being hanged firsts The first notice that I 
have yet come across of burning is that of Mother Lakeman at 
Ipswich, 1645. W. W., m his Dedication, speaks of these witches as 
" rygorously punished. Rygorously, sayd I ? Why it is too milde 
and gentle a tearme for such a mercilesse generation. I should rather 
have sayd most cruelly \] civilly] executed : for that no punishment 
can be thought upon, be it never so high a degree of tormet, which 
may be deemed sufficient for such a divelishe & danable practise"; 
and again, " the magistrates of forren landes . . . burning them with 
fire, whome the common lawe of Englande (with more mercie then is 
to be wished) strangleth with a rope." The burning was, I presume, 
inflicted under the ecclesiastical law, De hseret. comburendo. 
But burning was not at first universally adopted (a proof that it 
was not imposed by the common law), for at the Assizes at Maidstone, 
1652, they were hanged, but " Some . . . wished rather they might 
be burnt to Ashes : alledging that it was a received opinion amongst 
many [for in some cases it was held as proof against a witch that her 
mother had been burnt for the same crime] that the body of a witch 
being burnt, her blood is prevented thereby from becomming 
hereditary to the Progeny in the same evill, which by hanging is 
not.' 
P. 19. " Excommunicat persons." Evidence of Scot's haste, and of

--- PAGE 663 ---
General Notings on Scot's Text. 565 
his trusting to his memory. Wishing to find the Latin for "runna- 
waie", I looked into M. M. and found : " Nota quod excommunicati, 
item participes & socii criminis, item infames, et criminosi nec servi 
contra dominos admittentur ad agendum, & testificandum in causa 
fidei quacunque." It will be observed that he remembered " infames" 
as " infants", and, as there might have been a misprint in his copy, I 
have consulted all— not a short list — in the British Museum. Possi- 
bly he was influenced by W. W.'s book, which had taken a strong 
hold on him, if it were not one of the causes of his writing, for there, 
children from 6^ to 9 years (infants in law) were taken as witnesses 
against their mothers, while one woman's proof was that her infant 
in arms pointed to the house ! 
P. 24. " To the God speed." This, by the context, might be taken as 
meaning that he came to a fortunate issue. But it was, and is, in use 
as given to a person setting forth on a journey, etc. Hence, here, 
and especially at p. 481, it seems to mean that he came at the com- 
mencement, when one receives or gives this salutation. As is recorded 
in an instance at Windsor, " R. S. probably gave the God speed at 
the assembly, and God's name so frayed the witches that they fled, 
and so frayed the devil that he was conquered in a hand-to-hand 
fight." 
 "At shrift." This was laid down by Roman Catholic priests, 
though it was, and is, a rule with them that no confessor can reveal a 
confession, even before a court of law ! 
P. 41. " But bargained to." The sense requires " [not] to observe". 
Probably a slip of the printer, possibly through the " but", and the 
concurrence of two t's. 
P. 42. " La voltaP A fact strangely overlooked (as is David's danc- 
ing) by the damners of dancing. 
 " Socke the corps." The same in p. 124 explains that this is 
sewing the body in its winding-sheet or sheets. The phrase is 
Kentish. 
P. 45. "Young maister", their new master, they having just come 
under the devil's sway. 
P. 48. " Of fiftie." In Scot, as in others, we find uses of "of " which 
are to us strange. Here is a clearer example than usual of its 
synonymity with our " by". Cf. also p. 76, and Auth. Ver., i Cor. 
XV, 5-8. 
P. 50. " The veines have passage." For as little, others — as Paracel- 
sus, by R. Browning, etc. — have been credited— to the discomfiture of 
Harvey — with the knowledge of the circulation of the blood. Even 
Shakespeare is so credited by some whose knowledge will assert posi- 
tively that the moon is not made of green cheese. 
P. 60. " Their not fasting on fridaies." Scot's Protestantism here 
went beyond the ordained Protestantism of his age, as did that of B. 
Jonson's Cob. 
P. 78. " Clime up and take it." Not the nest, but his own belongings. 
A good example of the pronoun not referring to its grammatical ante- 
cedent, but to the antecedent which was most in the mind of the 
narrator.

--- PAGE 664 ---
566 
General Notings on Scot's Text. 
P. 80. "Away withall"=: "Companion with" here, in other places 
" agree with". An expression that sounds odd to us, but then used 
practically and metaphorically, fj om the idea of companionship on 
a journey, when companionship was almost or altogether necessary. 
P. 84. " The [night]mare." Most, I suppose — among them I myself 
— have known that these occur at times to a person in a deep sleep. 
My fourth nightmare, a horrible, troubled, and inconsequent dream, 
so far as I can remember, occurred some two years ago ; three, at 
only a month or two's interval between each, occurred years ago, when 
in a snake country. Then one appeared to be on and in my primitive 
bed, or wriggling about my wattle and daub bedroom, the only room I 
had. I thought myself wide-awake, bed, bedroom, and furniture being 
plainly visible, and my thoughts and conclusions were as coherent, 
and myself as self-possessed as at any moment of my life, until a 
sense of unreality came upon me, and by two or more vigorous efforts 
of both mind and body I awoke myself. My experience, and that 
recorded p. 84, will explain various ghostly stories — I do not say all — 
wherein the sufferer asserts positively, and believes, that he was wide- 
awake. 
 "As sure as a club." The derivation and meaning — as sure 
as is a tangible club that can or will strike you — is obvious; but I have 
heard it at the card-table, as though derived from the sureness of the 
cards thus named. An example of a false application arising from 
the apparent sameness of the words, and possibly in the first instance 
from a jocular use of the phrase. 
P. 85. "Hampton." Folk-lore worth recording. I conjecture, but 
only conjecture, that this word was suggested by the hempen or flaxen 
garments laid for his use, its sequent "hamten" being coined to rhyme 
with " stampen". 
P. 87. " To her that night." I have placed "him" in the margin, 
my own conjecture and the reading of the British Museum MS. of 
parts of Scot. But in Fletcher's Af. Thomas, iv, 6, we have the same 
spell, with some slight variations, and ending — 
" She would not sth- from him [St. George] that night", 
which more agrees with Shakespeare's quotation in Lear, iii, 4 — St. 
Withold 
"Bid her alight 
And her [the nightmare's] troth plight." 
 "Vidi'rimf, etc. Altered, apparently, from Vulgate, which 
has "Videntes . . . e