 with words all the diseases in mans 
bodie are healed, and wounds cured ; arowes are with wonderfuU 
strangenesse and cunning plucked out of mens bones. Yea (saith 
he) there be manie that can heale all bitings of dogs, or stingings of 
serpents, or anie other poison : and all with nothing but words 
spoken. And that which is most strange, he saith, that they can 
remedie anie stranger, and him that is absent, with that verie sword 
wherewith they are wounded. Yea and that which is beyond all

--- PAGE 327 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 31. 
admiration, if they stroke the sword upwards with their fingers, the 
partie shall feele no paine : whereas if they drawe their finger 
downewards thereupon, the partie wounded shall feele intollerable 
paine. With a number of other cures, done altogither by the vertue 
and force of words uttered and spoken. 
Where, by the waie, I maie not omit this special! note, given by 
M. Mai. to wit, that holie water maie not be sprinkled upon be- 
witched beasts, but must be powred into their mouthes. And yet he, 
and also Nider, saie, that It is lawfull to blesse and sanctifie beasts, 
as well as men ; both by charmes written, and also by holie words 
spoken. For (saith Meier) if your cow be bewitched, three crosses, 
three Pater nosters, and three Aves will certeinlie cure hir : and 
likewise all other ceremonies ecclesiasticall. And this is a sure 
Maxime* that they which are delivered from witchcraft by shrift, are 
ever after in the night much molested (I beleeve by their ghostlie 
fathers.) Also they loose their monie out of their pursses and 
caskets : as M. Mai. saith he knoweth by experience./ Also one 
generall rule is given by M. Mai. to all butter wives, and dairie 
maides, that they neither give nor lend anie butter, milke, or cheese, 
to anie witches, which alwaies use to beg therof, when they meane 
to worke mischeefe to their kine or whitmeats. Whereas indeed 
there are in milke three substances commixted ; to wit, butter, 
cheese, and whaie : if the same be kept too long, or in an evill 
place, or be sluttishlie used, so as it be stale and sower, which hap- 
peneth sometimes in3 winter, but oftener in summer, when it is set 
over the fier, the cheese and butter runneth togither, and congealeth, 
so as it will rope like birdlime, that you maie wind it about a sticke, 
and/ in short space it will be so drie, as you maie beate it to powder. 
Which alteration being strange, is woondered at, and imputed to 
witches. And herehence sometimes proceedeth the cause, why 
butter commeth not, which when the countrie people see that it com- 
meth not, then get they out of the suspected witches house, a little 
butter, whereof must be made three balles, in the name of the holie 
trinitie ; and so if they be put into the cherne, the butter will 
presentlie come, and the witchcraft will cease ; Sic ars deliiditur arte. 
But if you put a little sugar or sope into the cherne, among the 
creame, the butter will never come : which is plaine witchcraft, if it 
be closelie, cleanlie, and privilie handled. There be twentie severall 
waies to make your butter come, which for brevitie I omit ; as to 
bind your cherne with a rope, to thrust thereinto a red hot spit, &c : 
but your best remedie and surest waie is, to looke well to your dairie 
maid or wife, that she neither eat up the creame, nor sell awaie your 
butter. 
Mai. Male/, 
par. 2. qua. 2. 
cap. 7. 
Nider i7i prcF- 
ceptorio, py<r- 
cept. I. ca. II. 
Nider in for- 
nicario. 
Mai. Male/, 
part. 2. cap. 8. 
[» //«/.] 
28T. 
A good de- 
vise to 
starve up 
poore wo- 
men. 
Mai. Male/, 
part. 2. gutp. 
cap. 7. 
198. [2]

--- PAGE 328 ---
230 
Booke. 
The discoverie 
A ridi- 
culous 
charme. 
% A charme to find Mr that bewitched your kine. 
Put a paire of breeches upon the cowes head, and beate hir out 
of the pasture with a good cudgell upon a fridaie, and she 
will runne right to the witches doore, and strike thereat with hir 
homes. 
^ Another, for all that have bewitched anie kind of cattell. 
WHen anie of your cattell are killed with witchcraft, hast you 
to the place where the carcase lieth, and traile the bowels of 
282. the beast unto your house, and drawe them not in at/ the doore, but 
under the threshhold of the house into the kitchen ; and there make 
a fier, and set over the same a grediron, and thereupon laie the 
inwards or bowels ; and as they wax hot, so shall the witches 
entrailes be molested with extreame heate and paine. But then 
must you make fast your doores, least the witch come and fetch 
awaie a cole of your fier : for then ceaseth hir torments. And we 
have knowne saith M. Mai. when the witch could not come in, that 
the whole house hath beene so darkened, and the aire round about 
the same so troubled, with such horrible noise and earthquakes ; 
that except the doore had beene opened, we had thought the house 
would have fallen on our heads. Tho7nas Aqidnas, a principall 
treator herein, alloweth conjurations against the changelings, and in 
diverse other cases : whereof I will sale more in the word lidoni. 
In anie case 
observe the 
feslivall 
time, or 
else you 
marre all. 
[* or] 
199. [2] 
A 
^ A speciall charme to preserve all cattell from witchcraft. 
T Easter you must take certeine drops, that lie uppermost of 
thereof : and upon some sundaie morning rath, light it, and hold it, 
so as it male drop upon and betweene the homes and eares of the 
beast, saieng : hi nomine patris, filii, et duplex s s: and burne 
the beast a little betweene the homes on* the eares with the same 
wax : and that which is left thereof, slicke it in crossewise about the 
stable or stall, or upon the threshold, or over the doore, where the 
cattell use to go in and out, and for all that yeare your cattell shall 
never be be/witched. 4^ Otherwise : facobus de Chusa Carthicsianus 
sheweth, how bread, water, and salt is conjured, and saith, that if 
either man or beast receive holie bread and holie water nine dales 
together, with three Pater nosters, and three Aves, in the honour of 
the trinitie, and of S. Hubert, it preserveth that man or beast from

--- PAGE 329 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 22. 231 
all diseases, and defendeth them against all assaults of witchcraft, 
of satan, or of a mad dog, &c. 
Lo this is their stuffe, mainteined to be at the least effectual!, if 
not wholsome, by all papists and witchmongers, and speciallie of 
the last and proudest writers. But to proove these things to be 
efifectuall, God knoweth their reasons are base and absurd. For 
they write so, as they take the matter in question as granted,/ and 28j. 
by that meanes go awaie therewith. For L. Vairus saith in the L. Vair.lib. 
beginning of his booke, that there is no doubt of this supernaturall cap, i. 
matter, bicause a number of writers agree herein, and a number of 
stories confirme it, and manie poets handle the same argument, and 
in the twelve tables there is a lawe against it, and bicause the consent 
of the common people is fullie with it, and bicause immoderate 
praise is to be approoved a kind of witchcraft, and bicause old 
women have such charmes and superstitious meanes as preserve 
themselves from it, and bicause they are mocked that take awaie the 
credit of such miracles, and bicause Salomon saith ; Fascinatio Sapi. 4. 
malig}iitatis obscurat bona, and bicause the apostle saith ; O msensatt -pl^i 119. 
GalatcE, quis vos fascinavit ? And bicause it is written, Qui timent 
te, videbitnt ine. And finallie he saith, least you should seeme to 
distrust and detract anie thing from the credit of so manie grave 
men, from histories, and common opinion of all men : he meaneth 
in no wise to proove that there is miraculous working by witchcraft 
and fascination ; and proceedeth so, according to his promise. 
The xxii. Chapter. 
Lawfull charmes, or rather medicinable cures for diseased cattell. 
The charme of charmes, and the power thereof. 
|UT if you desire to learne true and lawfull charmes, to Direct and 
cure diseased cattell, even such as seeme to have extra- meanes 
ordinarie sicknesse, or to be bewitched, or (as they saie) ^jtg[i'"|t. 
strangelie taken : looke in B. Googe his third booke, 
treating of cattell, and happilie you shall find some good medicine or 
cure for them : or if you list to see more ancient stuffe, read Vegetius 
his foure bookes thereupon : or, if you be unlearned, seeke some 
cunning bullocke leech. If all this will not serve, then set fobs 
patience before your eies. And never thinke that a poore old woman 
can alter supernaturallie the notable course, which God hath appointed 
among his/ creatures. If it had beene Gods pleasure to have per- 284. 
mitted such a course, he would no doubt have both given notice in

--- PAGE 330 ---
232 12. Booke. The discoverie 
his word, that he had given such power unto them, and also would 
have taught remedies to have prevented them. 
Furthermore, if you will knowe assured meanes, and infallible 
charmes, yeelding indeed undoubted remedies, and preventing all 
maner of witchcrafts, and also the assaults of wicked spirits ; then 
20oJ'-' despise first all cou/sening knaverie of priests, witches, and couseners: 
and with true faith read the sixt chapter of S. Paiile to the Ephesians, 
and foUowe his counsell, which is ministred unto you in the words 
following, deserving worthilie to be called by the name insuing : 
A charm e 
of charmes 
taken out 
of the sixt 
chapter of 
S. Paule 
to the E- 
phesians. 
The charme of charmes. 
Finallie my brethren, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of 
his might. Pt(t on the whole armour of God, that you 7nay stand 
against the assaults of the divell. For we wrestle not against flesh 
and bloud, but against priticipalities and powers, 6-^ against worldlie 
governors the princes of the darkenes of this world, against spirituall 
wicked7tes, which are in the high places. For this cause take unto 
you the armour of God, that you may be able to resist in the evill 
date ; and having fijiished all things, stand fast. Stand therefore, 
and your loines girded about with veritie, atid having on the brestplate 
of righteousnes, &^c : as followeth in that chapter, verses 15. 16. 17. 
18. I Thes. 5. I Fet. 5, verse. 8. Ephes. i. and elsewhere in the 
holie scripture. 
\ Otherwise. 
IF you be unlearned, and want the comfort of freends, repaire to 
some learned, godlie, and discreet preacher. If otherwise need 
require, go to a learned physician, who by learning and experience 
knoweth and can discerne the difference, signes, and causes of such 
diseases, as faithlesse men and unskilfuU physicians impute to 
witchcraft./ / 
285. 
201. 
The xxiii. Chapter. 
A confutation of the force a7td verttie falselie ascribed to charmes 
and amulets, by the authorities of ancient writers, both divines 
and physicians. 
Y meaning is not, that these words, in the bare letter, can 
doo anie thing towards your ease or comfort in this 
behalfe ; or that it were wholesome for your bodie or 
soule to weare them about your necke : for then would 
I wish you to weare the whole Bible, which must needs be more

--- PAGE 331 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 2^ 
effectiiall than anie one parcell thereof. But I find not that the 
apostles, or anie of them in the primitive church, either carried S. 
Johns gospell, or anie Agmts Dei* about them, to the end they might 
be preserved from bugges : neither that they looked into the foure 
corners of the house, or else in the roofe, or under the threshhold, to 
find matter of witchcraft, and so to burne it, to be freed from the 
same ; according to the popish rules. Neither did they by such and 
such verses or praiers made unto saints, at such or such houres, 
seeke to obteine grace : neither spake they of anie old women that 
used such trades. Neither did Christ at anie time use or command 
holie water, or crosses, &c : to be used as terrors against the divell, 
who was not affraid to assault himselfe, when he was on earth. And 
therefore a verie vaine thing it is to thinke that he feareth these 
trifles, or anie externall matter. Let us then cast awaie these 
prophane and old wives fables. For (as Origen saith) Jjicantatiojies 
stmt dcemonu irrisiones idololatria fcBX, animarian infatttatio, &^c. 
Chrysostome saith ; There be some that carrie about their necks a 
peece of a gospell. But* is it not dailie read (saith he) and heard of 
all men But if they be never the better for it, being put into their 
eares, how shall they be saved, by carrieng it about their necks ? 
And further he saith ; Where is the vertue of the gospell ? In the 
figure of the letter, or in the understanding of the sense ? If in the 
figure, thou dooest well to weare it about thy/ necke ; but if in the 
understanding, then thou shouldest laie it up in thine heart. Attgiis- 
tine saith ; Let the faithfuU ministers admonish and tell their people, 
that these magicall arts and incantations doo bring no remedie to the 
infirmities either of men or cattell, &c. 
The heathen philosophers shall at the last daie confound the 
infidelitie and barbarous foolishnes of our christian or rather anti- 
christian and prophane witchmongers. For as Aristotle saith, that 
Incaiitamenta sunt nmliercularinn Jigmenta : so dooth Socrates (who 
was said to be cunning herein) afifirme, that Incantationes sunt verba 
anifnas decipientia hinnanas. Others saie ; Inscitia: pallium sttnt 
carmina^ 7naleficium, 6-* incantatio. Galen also saith, that such as 
impute the falling e/vill, and such like diseases to divine matter, and 
not rather to naturall causes, are witches, conjurers, &c. Hippocrates 
calleth them arrogant ; and in another place affirming that in his 
time there were manie deceivers and couseners, that would undertake 
to cure the falling evill, &c : by the power and helpe of divels, by 
burieng some lots or inchantments in the ground, or casting them 
into the sea, concludeth thus in their credit, that they are all knaves 
and couseners : for God is our onlie defender and deliverer. O 
notable sentence of a heathen philosopher !/ 
H H 
■ lial.-] 
Mai. Male/, 
part. 2. qu. 2 
cap. 6. 
I. Tim. 4, y. 
Origin, lib. 3. 
in Job. 
J. Chrysost. 
in Matth. 
* Marke 
that here 
was no la- 
tine service. 
Idem. Ibid. 
286. 
August. 26. 
qua. ultim. 
285. [=203.] 
Galcti. in lib. 
de comitiali . 
morbo. 
Hippocrat. 
lib, de morbo

--- PAGE 332 ---
2 34 13- Bo.,ke. The discoverie 
287. 
\ The xiii. booke. 
The first Chapter. 
Hicronymus. 
ill Gen. 41. 8, 
i!' 24. In 
Exod. 7, 13. 
In Dan. I, 20 
203. 
288. 
The au- 
thors in- 
tention 
touching 
the matter 
hereafter 
to be dis- 
coursed 
ijpon. 
The signification of the Hebriie word Hartumim., where it is found 
written in the scriptures, and how it is diverslie translated : 
whereby the objection of Pharaos magicians is afterward answered 
in this booke ; also of naturall inagicke not evill in it selfe. 
ARTUMIM is no naturall Hebrue word, but is borrowed 
of some other nation : howbeit, it is used of the Hebrues 
in these places ; to wit, Gen. 4. i. 8. 24. Exod. 7. 13. 24. 
& 8. 7. 18. & 9. II. Dan. i, 20. & 2. 2. Hierome soriie- 
times translateth it Conjectores, sometimes Malefici, sometimes 
Arioli : which we for the most part translate by this word witches. 
But the right signification heereof may be conceived, in that the 
inchanters of Pharao, being magicians of Aegypt, were called Har- 
tttmim. And yet in Exodus they are named in some Latine trans- 
lations Venefci. Rabbi Levi saith, it betokeneth such as doo strange 
and woonderfull things, naturallie, artificiallie, and deceitfuUie. 
Rabbi Isaac Natar affirmeth, that such were so termed, as amongst 
the Gentiles professed singular wisedome. Aben Ezra expoundeth 
it, to signifie such as knowe the secrets of nature, and the qualitie of 
stones and hearbs, &c : which is atteined unto by art, and/ speciallie 
by naturall magicke. But we, either for want of speach, or know- 
lege, call them all by the name/ and terme of witches. 
Certeinlie, God indueth bodies with woonderfull graces, the perfect 
knowledge whereof man hath not reached unto : and on the one 
side, there is amongst them such mutuall love, societie, and consent ; 
and on the other side, such naturall discord, and secret enimitie, that 
therein manie things are wrought to the astonishment of mans 
capacitie. But when deceit and diabolicall words are coupled there- 
with, then extendeth it to witchcraft and conjuration; as whereunto- 
those naturall effects are falselie imputed. So as heere I shall have 
some occasion to say somewhat of naturall magicke ; bicause under 
it lieth hidden the venome of this word Harttmiitn. This art is said 
by some to be the profoundnesse, and the verie absolute perfection 
of naturall philosophic, and shewing foorth the active part thereof, 
& through the aid of naturall vertues, by the convenient applieng of

--- PAGE 333 ---
. of Witchcraft. chap. j, 235 
them, works are published, exceeding all capacitie and admiration ; 
and yet not so much by art, as by nature. This art of it selfe is not 
evill ; for it consisteth in searching foorth the nature, causes, and 
effects of things. As farre as I can conceive, it hath beene more 
corrupted and prophaned by us Christians, than either by Jewes or 
Gentiles. 
The second Chapter. 
How the philosophers in times past travelled for the knowledge of 
naturall inngicke, of Salomons knowledge thereiii, who is to be 
called a naturall magician, a distinction thereof and why it is 
condemned for witchcraft. 
ANIE philosophers ; as namely Plato, Pythagoras, 
Empedocles, Democritus, &c : travelled over all the 
world, to find out & learne the knowlege of this art ; & 
at their returne they preached and taught, professed 
and published it. Yea, it should appeere by the magicians that 
came to adore Christ, that the knowledge and re/putation thereof 28g. 
was greater, than we conceive or make account of. But of all other, 
Salomon was the greatest traveller in this art, as may appeere 
throughout the booke of Ecclesiastes : and speciallie in the booke of 
Wisedome, where hee saith* God hath given me the true science of Sap. 7, 17 
things, so as I knowe how the world was made, and the power of the 19' 
elements, the beginning and the end, and the middest of times, how 
the times alter, and the change of seasons, the course of the yeare, 
and the situation of the starres, the nature of living things, and the 
furiousnesse of beasts, the power of the wind, and the imaginations 
of men, the diversities of plants, and the vertues of roots, and all 
things both secret and knowne, &c. Finallie, he was so cunning in ^'^ 
this art, that he is said to have bene a conjurer or witch, and is so 0/X'f,'T' 
reputed in the Romish church at this daie. Whereby you may see, 
how fooles and papists are inclined to credit false accusations in 
matters of/ witchcraft and conjuration. The lesse knowledge we 204. 
have in this art, the more we have it in contempt : in which respect 
Plato saith trulie to Dionysius ; They make philosophie a mockerie, 
that deliver it to prophane and rude people. Certeinlie, the witch- 
craft, conjuration, and inchantment that is imputed to Salomon, is Eccie. i. & i. 
gathered out of these his words following : I applied my mind to 
knowledge, and to search and seeke out science, wisedome and 
understanding, to knowe the foolishnesse of the ungodlie, and the

--- PAGE 334 ---
236 13 Booke. The discoverie . 
error of doting fooles. In this art of naturall magike (without great 
heed be taken) a student shall soone be abused. For manie (writing 
by report, without experience) mistake their authors, and set downe 
one thing for another. Then the conclusions being found false, the 
experiment groweth into contempt, and in the end seemeth ridiculous, 
though never so true. Plinie and Albert being curious writers 
heerein, are often deceived ; insomuch as Plinie is called a noble 
lier, and Albert a rusticall lier ; the one lieng by heeresaie, the other 
by authoritie. 
A magician ^ magician is indeed that which the Latines call a wise man, as 
and ihe art Nu?na PonipiUtis was among the Romans ; The Greeks, a philosopher, 
shed?^'" Socrates was among them ; the Aegyptians a. preest, as Hermes 
was ; the Cabalists called them prophets. But although these 
2go. distinguished this art, accounting the one part/ thereof infamous, as 
being too much given unto wicked, vaine, and impious curiositie, as 
unto moovings, numbers, figures, sounds, voices, tunes, lights, affec- 
tions of the mind, and words ; and the other part commendable, as 
teaching manie good and necessarie things, as times and seasons to 
sowe, plant, till, cut, &c : and diverse other things, which I will make 
manifest unto you heereafter : yet we generallie condemne the whole 
art, without distinction, as a part of witchcraft ; having learned to 
hate it, before we knowe it ; affirming all to be witchcraft, which our 
grosse heads are not able to conceive, and yet can thinke that an 
old doting woman seeth through it, &c. Wherein we consider not 
how God bestoweth his gifts, and hath established an order in his 
works, graffing in them sundrie vertues to the comfort of his severall 
creatures ; and speciallie to the use and behoofe of man : neither 
doo we therein weigh that art is servant unto nature, and waiteth 
upon hir as hir handmaiden. 
The third Chapter. 
Read Plinie 
in natural, 
hist. Cardan 
de reriim 
variet. Al- 
hertus de oc- 
culta rerum 
proprietate. 
What secrets do lie hidden, and what is taught in naturall 
magicke, how Gods glorie is magnified therein, and that it is 
nothing but the worke of nature. 
N this art of naturall magicke, God almightie hath hidden 
manie secret mysteries ; as wherein a man may learne 
the properties, qualities, and knowledge of all nature. 
For it teacheth to accomplish maters in such sort and 
oportunitie, as the common people thinketh the same to be miraculous;

--- PAGE 335 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 4. 
and to be compassed none other waie, but onelie by witchcraft. And 
yet in truth, naturall magicke is nothing else, but the vvorke of 
na/ture. For in tillage, as nature produceth corne and hearbs ; so 
art, being natures minister, prepareth it. Wherein times and seasons 
are greatlie to be respected : for Anmis non arvtts producit aristas. 
But as manie necessarie and sober things are heerein taught : so 
dooth it partlie (I sale) consist in such experiments and conclu/sions 
as are but toies, but neverthelesse lie hid in nature, and being 
unknovvne, doo seeme miraculous, speciallie when they are inter- 
medled and corrupted with cunning illusion, or legierdemaine, from 
whence is derived the estimation of witchcraft. But being learned 
and knowne, they are contemned, and appeere ridiculous : for that 
onelie is woonderfull to the beholder, whereof he can conceive no 
cause nor reason, according to the saieng of Ephesius, Miraculum 
solvitiir icnde videinr esse viiracichcm. And therefore a man shall 
take great paines heerein, and bestow great cost to learne that which 
is of no value, and a meere jugling knacke. Whereupon it is said, 
that a man may not learne philosophic to be rich ; but must get 
riches to learne philosophie : for to sluggards, niggards, & dizzards, 
the secrets of nature are never opened. And doubtlesse a man may 
gather out of this art, that which being published, shall set foorth 
the gloria of God, and be many waies beneficiall to the common- 
wealth : the first is doone by the manifestation of his works ; the 
second, by skilfullie applieng them to our use and service. 
Barthol. Ne- 
ap, in natu- 
ral, viagia. &r* 
viany others. 
205. 
2gi. 
Naturall 
magicke 
hath a dou- 
ble end, 
which pro- 
veth yc ex- 
cellencie of 
the same. 
The fourth Chapter. 
What strange thi?igs are brought to passe by nattirall magicke. 
HE dailie use and practise of medicine taketh awaie all 
admiration of the woonderfull effects of the same. 
Manie other things of lesse weight, being more secret 
and rare, seeme more miraculous. As for example (if it 
be true that J. Bap. Neap, and many other writers doo constantlie 
affirme.) Tie a wild bull to a figtree, and he will be presentlie tame ; 
or hang an old cocke thereupon, and he will immediatlie be tender ; 
as also the feathers of an eagle consume all other feathers, if they 
be intermedled together. Wherein it may not be denied, but nature 
sheweth hir selfe a proper workwoman. But it seemeth unpossible, 
that a little fish being but halfe a foot long, called Remora or Remi- 
Hgo, or/ of some Echeueis, staieth a mightie ship with all hir loade 2g2.

