 : and even at 
that instant he felt himselfe restored. 
Item, a reverend father, for his life, holinesse, and knowledge Ja- strmger. in 
notorious, being a frier of the order and companie of Spi7-e, reported, par. 2. qua. \. 
that a yoong man at shrift made lamentable moane unto him for the 
like losse : but his gravitie suffered him not to beleeve lightlie any 
such reports, and therefore madf the yoong man untrusse his cod- 
peece point, and sawe the complaint to be true and just. Whereupon

--- PAGE 160 ---
62 
4. Bnoke. 
The discoverie 
Mai. male/, 
cap. 7. far. 2. 
guirst. I. 
Note. 
62. 79- 
In vita Hie- 
rojiym. 
Saincts as holie 
and chaste as 
horsses <5r» 
mares. 
he advised or rather injoined the youth to go to the witch whome he 
suspected, and with flattering words to intreat hir, to be so good unto 
him, as to restore him his instrument : which by that meanes he ob- 
teined, and soone after returned to shew himselfe thankfull ; and told 
the hoHe father of his good successe in that behalfe : but he so be- 
leeved him, as he would needs be Oailattis testis, and made him pull 
downe his breeches, and so was satisfied of the troth and certeintie 
thereof. 
Another yoong man being in that verie taking, went to a witch for 
the restitution thereof, who brought him to a tree, where she shewed 
him a nest, and bad him clime up and take it. And being in the top 
of the tree, he tooke out a mightie great one, and shewed the same to 
hir, asking hir if he might not have the same. Naie (quoth she) 
that is our parish preests toole, but take anie other which thou wilt. 
And it is there affirmed, that some have found 20. and some 30. of 
them in one nest, being there preserved with provender, as it were 
at the racke and manger, with this note, wherein there is no con- 
tradiction (for all must be true that is written against witches) that 
If a witch deprive one of his privities, it is done onlie by prestigious 
meanes, so as the senses are but illuded. Marie by the divell it is 
reallie taken avvaie, and in like sort restored. These are no jestes, for 
they be written by them that were and are judges upon the lives and 
deaths of those persons. / 
The fift Chapter. 
0/ bishop Sylvanus his leacherie opened and covered againe, how 
maides Jiaving yelloiu haire are most combred with Incubus, how 
maried men are bewitched to use other jnens wives, and to 
refuse their ow7i. 
)U shall read in the legend, how in the night time 
Incubus came to a ladies bed side, and made hot loove 
unto hir : whereat she being offended, cried out so lowd, 
that companie came and found him under hir bed in the 
likenesse of the holie bishop Sylvanus, which holie man was much 
defamed therebie, untill at the length this infamie was purged by the 
confession of a divell made at S. Jeroms toombe. Oh excellent 
peece of witchcraft or cousening wrought by Sylvanus ! Item, S. 
Christine would needes take unto hir another maides hicubus, and 
lie in hir roome : and the storie saith, that she was shrewdlie accloied. 
But she was a shrew indeed, that would needes change beds with 
hir fellow, that was troubled everie night with Incubus, and deale 
with him hir selfe. But here the inquisitors note maie not be for-

--- PAGE 161 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 6. 
sotten, to wit : that Maides having yellow haire are most molested Maides having 
.... .. ., .. . . , , irr^T-. 7 yellow haiie. 
With this spirit. Also it is written in the Legend, of S. Barnard, 
that a pretie wench that had had the use of Incubus his bodie by the 
space of si.x or seven yeares in Agidfatiia (being beelike wearie of 
him for that he waxed old) would needes go to S. Barnard another 
while. But Incubus told hir, that if she would so forsake him, being 
so long hir true loover, he would be revenged upon hir, &c. But 
befall what would, she went to S. Barnard, who tooke hir his staffe, 
and bad her laie it in the bed besides hir. And indeed the divell 
fearing the bedstafife, or that S. Barnard laie there himselfe, durst 
not approch into hir chamber that night : what he did- afterwards, 
I am uncerteine. Marrie you may find other circumstances hereof, 
and manie other like bawdie lies in the golden Legend. But here 
againe we maie not forget the in/quisitors note, to wit; that manie Mai. Male/. 80. 
are so bewitched that they cannot use their owne wives : but anie ^^^j!^; ]' ^' 
other bodies they maie well enough away withall. Which witchcraft 
is practised among manie bad husbands, for whom it were a good 
excuse to sale they were bewitched. 
The sixt Chapter. 
How to procm'e the dissolving of bewitched love, also to enforce 
a man ( how proper so ever he be ) to love an old hag : and of a 
bawdie tricke of a priest in Gelderland. 
HE priests saie, that the best cure for a woman thus 
molested, next to confession, is excommunication. But 
to procure the dissolving of bewitched and constrained 
love, the partie bewitched must make a jakes of the 
lovers shooe. And to enforce a man, how proper so ever he be, to 
love an old hag, she giveth unto him to eate (among other meates) 
hir owne doong : and this waie one old witch made three abbats of 
one house succes/sivelie to die for hir love as she hir selfe confessed, 63. 
by the report of M. Mai. In Gelderla/id a priest persuaded a sicke of a bawdie 
woman that she was bewitched ; and except he might sing a masse j'^J^"' 
Geider- 
upon hir bellie, she could not be holpen. Whereunto she consented, 
and laie naked on the altar whilest he sang masse, to the satis- 
fieng of his lust ; but not to the *release of hir greefe. [■' reieafe ] 
Other cures I will speake of in other places more 
civill. Howbeit, certeine miraculous 
cures, both full of bawderie and 
lies, must either have 
place here, or 
none at all./

--- PAGE 162 ---
64 
Booke. 
Tlie discoverie 
Si. 
In coll. fatrunt. 
Grcgor. lib. I. 
dial. 2. 
In vitis fairum. 
Heraclides in 
paradise. 
82. 
Nider in forni- 
cario. 
The seventh Chapter. 
Of divers saincts and holie persons, which were exxeeding bawdie 
and lecherous, and by certeine miraculotts 7neanes became chaste. 
ASSIANUS writeth, that S. Syren being of bodie verie 
lecherous, and of mind woonderfull religious, fasted and 
praied ; to the end his bodie might be reduced miracu- 
louslie to chastitie. At length came an angell unto him 
by night, and cut out of his flesh certeine kernels, which were the 
sparkes of concupiscence ; so as afterwards he never had anie more 
motions of the flesh. It is also reported, that the abbat Equicius 
being naturallie as unchast as the other, fell to his beads so devoutlie 
for recoverie of honestie, that there came an angell unto him in an 
apparition, that seemed to geld him ; and after that (forsooth) he 
was as chaste as though he had had never a stone in his breech ; and 
before that time being a ruler over monkes, he became afterwards a 
governour over nunnes. Even as it is said Helias the holie monke 
gathered thirtie virgins into a monasterie, over whom he ruled and 
reigned by the space of two yeares, and grew so proud and hot in the 
codpeece, that he was faine to forsake his holie house, and flie to a 
desert, where he fasted and praied two daies, saieng ; Lord quench 
my hot lecherous humors, or kill me. Whereupon in the night 
following, there came unto him three angels, and demanded of him 
why he forsooke his charge : but the holie man was ashamed to tell 
them. Howbeit they asked him further, saieng ; Wilt thou returne 
to these damsels, if we free thee from all concupiscence .'' Yea (quoth 
he) with all my heart. And when they had sworne him solemnelie so 
to doo, they tooke him up, & gelded him ; and one of them holding 
his hands, and another his feete, the third cut out his stones. But the 
storie saith it was not so ended, but in a vision. Which I beleeve, 
because within five daies he returned to his minions, who pitiouslie 
moorned for him all this/ while, and joyfullie embraced his sweete 
companie at his returne. The like storie dooth Nider write 
of Thomas, whome two angels cured of that 
lecherous disease ; by putting about 
him a girdle, which they 
brought downe with 
them from 
heaven.

--- PAGE 163 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 8. 
64. 
The eight Chapter. 
Certei7ie popish and magicall cures, for them that are bewitched in 
their privities. 
I OR direct cure to such as are bewitched in the privie 
members, the first and speciall is confession : then follow 
in a row, holie water, and / those ceremoniall trumperies, 
Ave Maries, and all maner of crossings ; which are all 
said to be wholesome, except the witchcraft be perpetuall, and in 
that case the wife male have a divorse of course. 
Item, the eating of a haggister or pie helpeth one bewitched in Aiiter. 
that member. 
Item, the smoke of the tooth of a dead man. AUter. 
Item, to annoint a mans bodie over with the gall of a crow. AUter. 
Item, to fill a quill with quicke silver, and laie the same under the 
cushine, where such a one sitteth, or else to put it under the threshold 
of the doore of the house or chamber where he dwelleth. 
Item, to spet into your owne bosome, if you be so bewitched, is AUter. 
verie good. 
Item, to pisse through a wedding ring. If you would know who is AUter. 
hurt in his privities by witchcraft; and who otherwise is therein 
diseased, Hostiensis answereth : but so, as I am ashamed to english 
it : and therefore have here set downe his experiment in Latine ; 
Qua?ido virga nullatenits moveiur, £r» nunquam potuit cognoscere ; 
hoc est signiim frigiditatis : sed quando movetiir <Sr» erigitur, perficere 
autem non potest, est sigtium maleficii. 
But Sir Th. Moore hath such a cure in this matter, as I am 
ashamed to write, either in Latine or English : for in filthie baw- 
derie it passeth all the tales that ever I heard. But that is / rather Sj. 
a medicine to procure generation, than the cure of witchcraft, though 
it serve both turnes. 
Item, when ones instrument of venerie is bewitched, certeine AUter. 
characters must be written in virgine parchment, celebrated and 
holied by a popish priest ; and thereon also must the 141. Psalme be 
written, and bound Ad virifascinaii coxam. 
Item, one Katharine Loe (having a husband not so readilie disposed AUter. 
that waie as she wished him to be) made a waxen image to the 
likenes of hir husbands bewitched member, and offered it up at S. 
Anthonies altar; so as, through the holinesse of the masse it might be 
sanctified, to be more couragious, and of better disposition and 
abilitie, &c. 
K 
S. Thomas 
Moores, medicin- 
able receipt, &c.

--- PAGE 164 ---
66 
4. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Jaso. Piatoisis 
de cerebri niorbo, 
ca. lb. 
65. 
84. 
The priest is 
opinionative in 
the error of his 
phantasie. 
The ninth Chapter. 
A strange cure doom to one that was molested with Incubus. 
OW being wearied with the rehearsall of so manie 
lecheries most horrible, and very filthie and fabulous 
actions and passions of witches, together with the spirit 
Jjiciibus, I will end with a true storie taken out of Jason 
Pratensis, which though it be rude, yet is it not altogither so 
uncleane as the rest. 
There came (saith he) of late a masse priest unto me, making 
pitious moane, and saieng, that if I holpt him not, he should be 
undoone, and utterlie overthrowne ; so great was his infirmitie : for 
(saith he) I was woont to be faire and fat, and of an excellent com- 
plexion ; and lo how I looke, being now a verie ghost consisting of 
skinne and bone, &c. What is the matter (quoth Jason ?) I will 
shew you sir, said the priest. There commeth unto mee, almost 
everie night, a certeine woman, unknowne unto me, and/ lieth so 
heavie upon my brest, that I cannot fetch my breath, neither have 
anie power to crie, neither doo my hands serve me to shoove hir 
awaie, nor my feete to go from hir. I smiled (quoth Jason) and told 
him that he was vexed with a disease called Infcubus, or the mare ; 
and the residue was phantasie and vaine imagination. Naie (said 
the priest) it cannot be so : for by our blessed ladie, I tell you 
nothing but that with waking I saw with mine eies, and felt with 
mine hands. I see hir when she commeth upon me, and strive to 
repell hir; but I am so infeebled that I cannot: and for remedie T 
have runne about from place to place, but no helpe that I could get. 
At length I went to an old frier that was counted an od fellow ; and 
thought to have had help at his hands, but the divell a whit had I of 
him; saving that for remedie he willed me to praie to God ; whome I 
am sure I wearied with my tedious praiers long before. Then went I 
unto an old woman (quoth the priest) who was said to be a cunning 
witch : and she willed me, that the next morning, about the dawning 
of the dale, I should pisse, and immediatlie should cover the pispot, 
or stop it with my right netherstocke, and before night the witch 
should come to visit me. And although (quoth he) the respect of 
mine orders somewhat terrified me from the execution of hir advise; 
yet my necessities diverse waies, and speciallie my paines moved 
me to make triall of hir words. And by the masse (quoth the priest) 
hir prophesie fell out as sure as a club. For a witch came to my 
house, and complained of a greefe in hir bladder, and that she could 
not pisse. But I could neither by faire nor fowle meanes obteine at

--- PAGE 165 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 10. 
hir hands, that she would leave molesting me by night; but she 
keepeth hir old custome, determining by these filthie meanes to 
dispatch me. I could hardlie (saith Jason) reclaime him from this The priest 
mad humor ; but by that time he had beene with me three or foure 
times, he began to comfort himselfe, and at last perceiving it, he 
acknowledged his disease, and recovered the same./ 
recovered. 
The tenth Chapter. 
A confutation of all the fonner follies touching Incubus, which 
by examples atid proof es of like stuffe is shewed to be fat knaverie, 
ivherein the carnall copulation with spirits is overthrowne. 
ol Incubus. 
66. 
HUS are lecheries covered with the cloke of Incubus 
and witchcraft, contrarie to nature and veritie : and 
with these fables is mainteined an opinion, that men have 
beene begotten without carnall copulation (as Hyperius 
and others write that Merlin was, An. 440.) speciallie to excuse and Merlin begotten 
mainteine the knaveries and lecheries of idle priests and bawdie 
monkes ; and to cover the shame of their lovers and concubines. 
And alas, when great learned men have beene so abused, with the 
imagination of Incubus his carnall societie with women, miscon- 
struing the scriptures, to wit, the place in Genesis 6. to the seducing 
of manie others ; it is the lesse woonder, that this error hath passed so 
generallie among the common people./ 
But to use few words herein, I hope you understand that they 
affirme and saie, that Incubus is a spirit ; and I trust you know that a 
spirit hath no flesh nor bones, &c: and that he neither dooth eate 
nor drinke. In deede your grandams maides were woont to set a boll 
of milke before him and his cousine Robin good-fellow, for grinding 
of malt or mustard, and sweeping the house at midnight : and you 
have also heard that he would chafe exceedingly, if the maid or 
good-wife of the house, having compassion of his nakednes, laid anie 
clothes for him, beesides his messe of white bread and milke, which 
was his standing fee. For in that case he saith ; What have 
we here ? Hemton hamten, here will I never more tread nor 
stampen. 
But to proceed in this confutation. Where there is no meate eaten, 
there can be no seed which thereof is ingendred : although it be 
granted, that Robin could both eate and drinke, as being a/ cousening 
idle frier, or some such roge, that wanted nothing either belonging to 
lecherie or knaverie, &c. Item, where the genitall members want, 
there can be no lust of the flesh : neither dooth nature give anie desire 
of generation, where there is no propagation or succession recjuired. 
Quia huvior 
sl^cnnaticus ex 
succo alimentari 
provL-uit, 
86.

--- PAGE 166 ---
68 
4. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Ad faniltatem 
generandi tarn 
interna quam 
exti'rtia organa 
requiniiitur. 
And as spirits cannot be greeved with hunger, so can they not be 
inflamed with lustes. And if men should Uve ever, what needed 
succession or heires ? For that is but an ordinance of God, to supphe 
the place, the number, the world, the time, and speciallie to ac- 
complish his will. But the power of generation consisteth not onlie 
in members, but chieflie of vitall spirits, and of the hart : which 
spirits are never in such a bodie as Incubus hath, being but a bodie 
assumed, as they themselves saie. And yet the most part of writers 
herein affirme, that it is a palpable and visible bodie ; though all be 
phansies and fables that are written hereupon. 
What Incubus is, 
6^ who be most 
troubled ther- 
with. 
87. 
67. 
[ ? him. MS.] 
M. maltfic. 
The eleventh Chapter. 
That Incubus is a naturall disease, witJi remedies for the same, 
besides ma^icall cures herewithall expressed. 
jUT in truth, this Incubus is a bodilie disease (as hath 
beene said) although it extend unto the trouble of the 
mind : which of some is called The mare, oppressing 
manie in their sleepe so sore, as they are not able to 
call for helpe, or stir themselves under the burthen of that heavie 
humor, which is ingendred of a thicke vapor proceeding from 
the cruditie and rawnesse in the stomach : which ascending up 
into the head oppresseth the braine, in so much as manie are much 
infeebled therebie, as being nightlie haunted therewith. They 
are most troubled with this disease, that being subject thereunto, 
lie right upward : so as, to turne and lie on the one side, is present 
remedie. Likewise, if anie heare the groning of the partie, speake 
unto him, so as he wake him, he is presentlie releeved. Howbeit, 
there are magicall cures for it, as for example./ 
S. George, S. George, our ladies knight, 
He walkt by daie, so did he by night : / 
Untill such time as he hir found, 
He hir beat and he hir bound, 
Untill hir troth she to him plight, 
She would ftot come to hir'*' that night. 
Whereas S. George our ladies knight, was named three times 
S. George. 
Item, hang a stone over the afflicted persons bed, which stone hath 
naturallie such a hole in it, as wherein a string may be put through 
it, and so be hanged over the diseased or bewitched partie ; be it 
man, woman, or horsse. 
Item, you shall read in M. Malefic, that excommunication is verie

--- PAGE 167 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 12. 
notable, and better than any charme for this purpose. There are also P"-^- ^ ''^^f-^ 
other verses and charmes for this disease devised, which is the 
common cloke for the ignorance of bad physicians. But Leonard Leon. Fuchsius 
Fuchsiiis in his first booke, and 31. chapter, dooth not onelie describe iltto'tu"'^' 
this disease, and the causes of it ; but also setteth downe verie 
learnedlie the cure thereof, to the utter confusion of the witchmongers 
follie in this behalfe. Hyperius being much bewitched and blinded 
in this matter of witchcraft, hoovering about the interpretation of 
Genesis 6. from whence the opinion of Incubus and Succubus 
is extorted, Viderunt filii Dei filias kominmn, quod elegantes 
essent, acceperunt sibi in uxores ex omnibus, quas elegerant, Ss^c : 
seemeth to mainteine upon heare-saie, that absurd opinion ; and 
yet in the end is driven to conclude thus, to wit : Of the evill 
spirits Incubus and Sticcubus there can be no firme reason or 
proofs brought out of scriptures, using these verie words ; 
Hcsc ut probabilia dicta sunto, qttandoquidem scripturarum prce- 
sidio hac in causa destituimur. As if he should saie. Take this 
as spoken probablie ; to wit, by humane reason, bicause we are 
destitute of scriptures to mainteine the goodnesse of the cause. 
Tertullian and Sulpicius Severus doo interpret Filias Dei in that 
place to be angels, or evill spirits, and to have beene enamored with 
the beautie of those wenches ; and finallie, begat giants by / them. 
Which is throughlie confuted by Chrysostome, Hotn. 22. in Gen : but 
speciallie by the circumstance of the text. 
Tirtull. in 
libra de habit u 
muliebri. 
Sulp. Sever, in 
efitotne hist. 
sacr. 
The twelfe Chapter. 
The censure of G. Chaucer, upon the knaverie of Incubus. 
low will I (after all this long discourse of abhominable 
cloked knaveries) here conclude with certeine of G. 
Chaucers verses, who as he smelt out the absurdities 
. ^ of poperie, so found he the priests knaverie in this 
matter of Incubus, and (as the time would suffer him) he derided 
their follie and falshood in this wise : 
* Fornow the great charitie and praiers 
Of limitors and other holie friers, 
That searcheti everie land atid everie streame 
As thicke as motes in the sunne beame,l 
Blissing halles, kitchens, chambers dr' bowers, 
Cities, borroghes, castels and hie towers, 
Thropes, barnes, shepens, and dairies. 
This maketh that there beene now no fairies ; 
Geffr. Chau. in 
the beginning of 
the wife of Baths 
tale. 
68. 
[* Ital.-\

--- PAGE 168 ---
70 
4. Booke. 
The discoverie 
For there as woont to walken was an el/e, 
There walketh now the limitor himselfe, 
In tmdermcales, and in mornings. 
And saitli his mattens and his holie things 
As hegoeth in his limitatiowne, 
Women may go safelie tip and downe, 
In everie bush, and tinder everie tree, 
[•Te>;t J.] There nis none other * Incubus but hee, S^cj /

--- PAGE 169 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. I. 
7t 
The fift Booke. 
The first Chapter. 
Of transforntations, ridiculous examples brought by the adver- 
saries for the confirmation of their foolish doctrine. 
OW that I may with the verie absurdities, conteined 
in their owne authors, and even in their principall 
doctors and last writers, confound them that main- 
teine the transubstantiations of witches : I will shew 
69. 
you certeine proper stuffe, which Bodin (their cheefe champion of ^^.^^^^j^'^*' ^' 
this age) hath gathered out of M. Mai. and others, whereby he cap, 6. 
laboureth to establish this impossible, incredible, and supernatural!, 
or rather unnaturall doctrine of transubstantiation. 
First, as touching the divell {Rodin saith) that he dooth most J- Bodin 
,. , ,. ^ ,. abuseth scripture 
properlie and commonlie transforme himselfe mto a gote, connrmmg to proove a He. 
that opinion by the 33. and 34. of Esaie : where there is no one title* [* = "it'e-] 
sounding to anie such purpose. Howbeit, he sometimes alloweth 
the divell the shape of a blacke Moore, and as he saith he used to 
appeare to Mawd Cruse, Kate Darey, and fone Harviller. But I 
mervell, whether the divell createth himselfe, when he appeareth in 
the likenesse of a man ; or whether God createth him, when the 
divell wisheth it. As for witches, he saith they speciallie transub- 
stantiate themselves into wolves, and them whom they bewitch into 
asses : though else-where he differ somewhat herein / from himselfe. 
But though he affirme, that it may be naturallie brought to passe, 
that a girle shall become a boie ; and that anie female may be turned 
into the male : yet he saith the same hath no affinitie with Lycan- 
thropia ; wherein he saith also, that men are wholie transformed, and 
citeth infinite examples hereof. 
First, that one Garner in the shape of a woolfe killed a girle of the 
age of twelve yeares, and did eat up hir armes and legges, and carried 
the rest home to his wife. Item, that Peter Bur get, and Michael 
Werdon, having turned themselves with an ointment into woolves, 
killed, and finallie did eate up an infinite number of people. Which 
lie Wierus dooth sufficientlie confute. But untill you see and read 
that, consider whether Peter could eate rawe flesh without sur- 
fetting, speciallie flesh of his owne kind. Item, that there was an 
arrowe shot into a woolves thigh, who afterwards being turned into his 
go. 
Pudendis tunc 
primkm crtim- 
fc^itibiis. 
Jo. Wier. lib. 6. 
de mag ca. 12.

