 of childwives. Opis was called 
the mother of the babe new borne, whose image women with child 
hanged upon their girdles before their bellies, and bare it so by/ the 
space of nine moneths ; and the midwife alwaies touched the child 
therewith, before she or anie other laied hand thereon. 
If the child were well borne, they sacrificed therunto, although the 
mother miscaried : but if the child were in any part unperfect, or 
dead, &c : they used to beate the image into powder, or to burne or 
drowne it. Vagianus was he that kept their children from crieng, and 
therefore they did alwaies hang his picture about babes necks : 
for they thought much crieng in youth portended ill fortune in age. 
Cuninus, otherwise Cunius, was he that preserved (as they thought) 
[* Liber\ 
A good god 
and god- 
desse for 
women. 
524- 
The names 
of certeine 
heathenish 
gods, and 
their pecu- 
liar offices.

--- PAGE 538 ---
440 Chap. 23. A discourse of 
their children from misfortune in the cradell. Ruminus was to keepe 
their dugs from corruption. Vohcimtus and his wife Volutmia were 
376. gods, the one for yoong men, the other for/ maids that desired 
marriage : for such as praied devoutlie unto them, should soone be 
married. Agrestis was the god of the fields, and to him they praied 
for fertilitie. Belhis was the god of warre & warriers, and so also 
was Victoria, to whome the greatest temple in Rome was built. 
Hojiorius was he that had charge about inkeepers, that they should 
well intreat pilgrimes. Berecy7ithia was the mother of all the gods. 
Aesculantis was to discover their mines of gold and silver, and to him 
they praied for good successe in that behalfe. Aesculapius was to 
cure the sicke, whose father was Apollo, and served to keepe weeds 
out of the corne. Segacia was to make seeds to growe. Flora pre- 
served the vines from frosts and blasts. Sylvanus was to preserve 
them that walked in gardens. Bacchus was for droonkards, Favor 
for cowherds ; Meretrix for whores, to whose honour there was 
a temple built in Rome, in the middest of fortie and foure streets, 
which were all inhabited with common harlots. Finallie Colatina, 
["alias itai,] *alias Clo/ifia, was goddesse of the stoole, the jakes, and the privie, 
homei'ie whome as to everie of the rest, there was a peculiar temple edified: 
charge. besides that notable temple called Fantheon, wherein all the gods 
were placed togither; so as everie man and woman, according to their 
follies and devotions, might go thither and worship what gods they 
list./ 
5^5- 
The xxiii. Chapter. 
Beasts, 
birds, ver- 
mine, fishes, 
herbs and 
other trum- 
perie wor- 
shipped as 
gods. 
0/ diverse gods in diverse countries. 
[he Aegyptians were yet more foolish in this behalfe than 
the Romatis (I meane the heathenish Ro^natts that then 
were, and not the popish Romaiis that now are, for no 
nation approcheth neere to these in anie kind of idolatrie.) 
The Aegyptians worshipped A?iubis in the likenesse of a dog, bicause 
he loved dogs and hunting. Yea they worshipped all living creatures, 
as namelie of beasts, a bullocke, a dog, & a cat ; of flieng fowles. 
Ibis (which is a bird with a long bill, naturallie devouring up venem- 
ous things and noisome serpents) and a sparrowhawke ; of fishes 
they had two gods ; to wit, Lepidotus piscis, and Oxyrinchus. The 
Saltans and Thebans had to their god a sheepe. In the citie Lyco- 
polis they worshipped a vvoolfe ; in Herinopolis, the Cynocephalus ; 
the Leopolitans, a lion ; in Lcctopolis, a fish in Alius called Latiis.

--- PAGE 539 ---
Divels and spirits. Chap. 24. 44 I 
In the citie Cytiopolis they worshipped Antibis. At Babylon, besides 
Memphis, they made an onion their god ; the Thebans an eagle ; the 
McEtideseaiis, a goate ; the Persians, a fier called Orimasda ; the 
Arabians, Bacchus, Vem/s, and Diasaren ; the Bceotians, Amphia- 
ratis ; the Aphricans, Mopsus ; the Scithians, Minerva ; the Naii- 
cratits, Serapis, which is a serpent ; Astartes (being as Cicero writeth 
the fourth Venus, who was she, as others affirme, whom Salomon 
worshipped at his concubines request) was the goddesse of the 
Assyrians. At Noricum, being a part of Bavaria, they worship 
Tibilenus ; the Moores worship Juba ; the Macedoniatts, Gabirus ; 
the Pwnians, Ura7iius ; at Sainos Jitno was their god ; at Paphos, 
Venus ; at Lemnos, Vulcane ; at Naxos, Liberiis ; at/ Lampsacke, 377. 
Priapus with the great genitals, who was set up at Hellespont to be 
adored. In the ile Diomedea, Diomedes ; at Delphos, Apollo ; at 
Ephesus, Diana was worshipped. And bicause they would plaie 
small game ra/ther than sit out, they had Acharus Cyrenaicus, to 526. 
keepe them from flies and flieblowes ; Hercules Cajiopiiis, to keepe 
them from fleas ; Apollo Parnopeius, to keepe their cheefes from 
being mouseaten. The Greeks were the first, that I can learne to g™^'^^^'^^ 
have assigned to the gods their principall kingdomes and offices : as their assi- 
Jupiter to rule in heaven, Pluto in hell, Neptune in the sea, &c. To 
these they joined, as assistants, divers commissioners ; as to Jupiter, 
Saturne, Mars, Venus, Mercuric, and Minerva : to Neptune, Neretis, 
&r=c. Tutilina was onelie a mediatrix to Jupiter, not to destroie corne 
with thunder or tempests, before whom they usuallie lighted candels 
in the temple, to appease the same, according to the popish custome 
in these daies. But I may not repeate them all by name, for the 
gods of the gentiles were by good record, as Varro and others The num- 
report, to the number of 30. thousand, and upward. Whereby the among the 
reasonable reader may judge their superstitious blindnesse. gentiles 
The xxiiii. Chapter. 
OJ popish provinciall gods, a comparison betweene them and 
heathen gods, oJ physicall gods, and oJ what occupation everie 
popish god is. 
jjOW if I thought I could make an end in anie reasonable 
time, I would begin with our antichristian gods, other- 
wise called popish idols, which are as ranke divels as 
|H1 Dii gentium spoken of in the psalmes: or as Dii inontium 
set foorth & rehearsed in the first booke of the kings ; or as Dii 
Reg. 20. 
. Chr. ■^2. 
. Chr. 16.

--- PAGE 540 ---
442 Chap. 24. . A discourse of 
s^Chr^ 
/^'^v-ar/iTw or Dii popiiloritm mentioned in the second of the Chronicles 
2. Reg. 23, 32. & in the first of the Chronicles 16. or as Dii terrce in Judges 3. or 
as Dii filior2{m Seir in the second of the Chronicles 25. or as Dii 
alieni, which are so often mentioned in the scriptures. 
Surelie, there were in the popish church more of these in number, 
more in common, more private, more publike, more for lewd pur- 
poses, and more for no purpose, than among all the heathen, either 
32y. heretofore, or at this present time : for I dare undertake,/ that 
for everie heathen idoU I might produce twentie out of the popish 
Popish gods church. For there were proper idols of everie nation : as S. George 
of nations. i i -> 
on horssebacke for England (excepting whome there is said to be no 
more horssemen in heaven save onelie saint Martine) S. Andrew for 
Burgundie and Scotland, S. Michael for France, S. Jatnes for Spaine, 
S. Patrike for Ireland, S. Davie for Wales, S. Peter for Rome, and 
some part of Italie. Had not everie citie in all the popes dominions 
his severall patrone As Patile for Lo7tdon, Denis for Paris, Atnbrose 
for Millen, Loven for Gattni, Roniball for Madeline, S. Marks lion for 
378. Venice, the three magician kings for Cullen,* and so of other./ Yea, had 
Parish gods they not for everie small towne, and everie village and parish, t (the 
or popish names wherof I am not at leisure to repeat) a severall idoll.? As S. 
idols ^ ' 
[» = Cologne] Sepulchre, for one ; S. Bride, for another ; S. All halovves, All saints, 
[t . in text] and our Ladie for all at once : which I thought meeter to rehearse, 
[} = bead—] than a bedrollj of such a number as are in that predicament. Had 
they not hee idols and shee idols, some for men, some for women, 
some for beasts, and some for fovvles, &c ? Doo you not thinke 
that S. Martine might be opposed to Bacchusl If S. Martine be too 
weake we have S. Urbane, S. Clement, and manie other to assist 
him. Was Venus and Meretrix an advocate for whoores among the 
Gentiles ? Behold, there were in the Romish church to encounter 
with them, S. Aphra, S. Aphrodite, and S. Matidline. But insomuch 
as long Meg was as verie a whoore as the best of them, she had 
wrong that she was not also canonized, and put in as good credit as they: 
for she was a gentlewoman borne ; whereunto the pope hath great 
respect in canonizing of his saints. For (as I have said) he canonizeth 
the rich for saints, and burneth the poore for witches. But I doubt 
not, Magdalen, and manie other godlie women are verie saints in 
heaven, and should have beene so, though the pope had never canonized 
them : but he dooth them wrong, to make them the patronesses of 
harlots and strong strumpets. 
See the Was there such a traitor among all the heathen idols, as S. Thomas 
gend'^for ^ Beckefi Or such a whoore as S. Bridget! I warrant you S. Hugh 
the life of good a huntesman as Anubis. Was Vulcane the protector of 
S. Bridget. ^ 
the heathen smithes 
Yea forsooth, and S. Euloge was patrone for

--- PAGE 541 ---
Divels and spirits. 
chap. 24. 
443 
He saints & 
shee saincts 
of the old 
stamp with 
their pecu- 
liar vertues 
touching 
the curing 
of diseases. 
ours. Our painters had Luke, our weavers/ had Steveft, our millers 5^<?. 
had Arnold, our tailors had Goodman, our sowters had Crispine, our 
potters had S. Gore with a divell on his shoulder and a pot in his hand. 
Was there a better horseleech among the gods of the Gentiles than 
S. Loy'i Or a better sowgelder than S. Attthonie} Or a better 
toothdrawer than S. Apollinel I beleeve that Apollo Parnopeiz(swa.s 
no better a ratcatcher than S. Gertrude, who hath the popes patent 
and commendation therefore. The T/iebans had not a better shepherd 
than S. Wendeline, nor a better gissard to keepe their geese than 
Callus. But for physicke and surgerie, our idols exceeded them all. For 
S. John, and S. Valentine excelled at the falling evil!, S. Roch was 
good at the plague, S. Petronill at the ague. As for S. Margaret, she 
passed Lucina for a midwife, and yet was but a maid : in which 
respect S. Marpiirge is joined with hir in commission. 
For mad men, and such as are possessed with divels, S. Romane 
was excellent, & frier Ruffine was also pretilie skilfull in that art. For 
botches and biles, Cosnius and Daniian ; S. Clare for the eies, S. 
Apolline for teeth, S. Job for the * pox. And for sore brests S. Agatha 
was as good as Ruininus. Whosoever served Se>-vatms well, should 
be sure to loose nothing : if Servathcs failed in his office, S. Vmden 
could supplie the matter with his cunning ; for he could cause all things 
that were lost to be restored againe. But here laie a strawe for a 
while, and I will shew you the names of some, which exceed these 
verie far, and might have beene canonized for archsaints ; all the other 
saints or idols being in comparison of them but bunglers, and bench- 
w-histlers. And with your leave, when all/ other saints had given over 
the matter, and the saints utterlie forsaken of their servitors, they re- 
paired to these that I shall name unto you, with the good consent of 
the pope, who is the fautor, or rather the patrone of all the saints, 
divels, and idols living or dead, and of all the gods save one. And 
whei'eas none other saint could cure above one disease, in so much as 
it was idolatrie, foUie I should have said, to go to Job for anie other 
maladie than the pox ; nothing commeth amisse to these. For they 
are good at anie thing, and never a-whit nice of their cunning : yea 
greater matters are said to be in one of their powers, than is in all the 
other saints. And these are they : S. mo/ther Bungle, S. mother Paine, S^9- 
S. Feats, S. mother Still, S. mother Dutton, S. Kytrell, S. New saints, 
Ursula Keinpe, S. mother Newman, S. doctor Heron, 
S. Rosiniund a. good old father, & diverse 
more that deserve to be registred 
in the popes kalendar, or 
rather the divels 
rubrike. 
* For tlie 
Fi ech pox 
or the 00- 
mon kind 
of po.x, or 
both ? This 
would be 
knowne. 
379.

--- PAGE 542 ---
444 
Chap. 
A discotirse of 
The XXV. Chapter. 
Divos vo- 
cant Gram- 
matici cos 
qui ex ho- 
minibus dH 
facti sunt. 
Sjo. 
Cic. de natiir, 
deorum. 
380, 
The papists 
see a moth 
in the eie of 
others, but 
no beame 
in their 
owne. 
A comparison betweene the heathen and papists, touching their 
excuses for idolatrie. 
|ND bicause I know, that the papists will saie, that their 
idols are saints, and no such divels as the gods of the 
Gentiles were : you may tell them, that not onelie their 
saints, but the verie images of them were called Divi. 
Which though it signifie gods, and so by consequence idols or feends : 
yet put but an (//) thereunto, and it is Divill in English. But they 
will saie also that I doo them wrong to gibe at them ; bicause they 
were holie men and holie women. I grant some of them were so, and 
further from allowance of the popish idolatrie emploied upon them, 
than greeved with the derision used against that abuse. Yea even as 
silver and gold are made idols unto them that love them too well, and 
seeke too much for them : so are these holie men and women made 
idols by them that worship them, and attribute unto them such honor, 
as to God onelie apperteineth. 
The heathen gods were for the most part good men, and profitable 
members to the commonwealth wherein they lived, and deserved fame, 
&c : in which respect they made gods of them when they were dead ; 
as they made divels of such emperors and philosophers as they hated, 
or as had deserved ill among them. And is it not even so, and woorsse, 
in the commonwealth and church of poperie.' Dooth not the pope 
excommunicate, cursse, and condemne for heretikes, and drive to the 
bottomlesse pit of hell, proclaming to be verie divels, all those that 
either write, speake or thinke contrarie to his idolatrous doctrine ? 
Cicero, when he de/rided the heathen gods, and inveied against them 
that yeelded such servile honor unto them, knew the persons, unto 
whom such abuse was committed, had well deserved as civill citizens ; 
and that good fame was due unto them, and not divine estimation. 
Yea the infidels that honored those gods, as hoping to receive benefits 
for their devotion emploied that waie, knew and conceived that the 
statues and images, before whome with such reverence/ they powred 
foorth their praiers, were stockes and stones, and onelie pictures of 
those persons whome they resembled : yea they also knew, that the 
parties themselves were creatures, and could not doo so much as the 
papists and witchmongers thinke the Roode of grace, or mother 
Bnngie could doo. And yet the papists can see the abuse of the 
Gentils, and may not heare of their owne idolatrie more grosse and 
damnable than the others.

--- PAGE 543 ---
Divels and spirits. chap. 26. 445 
The xxvi. Chapter. 
The conceipt of the heathen ajid the papists all one hi idolatrie, 
of the councell of Tretit, a Jtotable storie of a hangman 
arraigned after he was dead and buried, dr'c. 
The idola- 
trous c )un- 
UT papists perchance will denie, that they attribute so 
much to these idols as I report ; or that they thinke it so 
meritorious to praie to the images of saints as is supposed, 
I affirming that they worship God, and the saints them- 
selves, under the formes of images. Which was also the conceipt of 
the heathen, and their excuse in this behalfe ; whose eiesight and 
insight herein reached as farre as the papisticall distinctions published 
by popes and their councels. Neither doo anie of them admit so 
grosse idolatrie, as the councell of Trent hath doone, who alloweth 
that worship to the Rood that is due to Jesus Christ himselfe, and so cell of 
likewise of other images of saints. I thought it not impertinent 
therfore in this place to insert an example taken out of the Rosa- 
rie of our Ladie, in which booke doo remaine (besides this) ninetie 
and eight examples to this effect : which are of such authoritie in/ 
the church of Rome, that all scripture must give place unto them. 53^- 
And these are either read there as their speciall homilies, or preached 
by their cheefe doctors. And this is the sermon for this daie verba- 
tim translated out of the said Rosarie, a booke much esteemed and 
reverenced among papists. 
A certeine hangman passing by the image of our Ladie, saluted Exemfi.^. 
hir, commending himselfe to hir protection. Afterwards, while he 
praied before hir, he was called awaie to hang an offender : but his 
eniniies intercepted him, and slew him by the waie. And lo a cer- 
teine holie preest, which nightlie walked about everie church in the 
citie, rose up that night, and was going to his ladie, I should sale to 
our ladie church. And in the churchyard he saw a great manie dead 
men, and some of them he knew, of whome he asked what the 
matter was, &c. Who answered, that the hangman was slaine, and 
the divell challenged his soule, the which our ladie said was hirs : 
and the judge was even at hand comming thither to heare the cause, 
& therefore (said they) we are now come togither. The preest 
thought he would be at the hearing hereof, and hid himselfe behind But our la- 
o ) 1 J r '''^ spied 
a tree ; and anon he saw the judiciall seat readie prepared and fur- him well 
nished, where the judge, to wit Jesus Christ, sate, who tooke up his ^"""^fj"' 
mother unto him. Soone after the divels brought in the hangman shai read.

--- PAGE 544 ---
446 
Chap. 27. 
A discourse of 
pinnioned, and prooved by good evidence, that his soule belonged to 
381. them. On the/ other side, our ladie pleaded for the hangman, proov- 
ing that he, at the houre of death, commended his soule to hir. The 
judge hearing the matter so well debated on either side, but willing 
to obeie (for these are his words) his mothers desire, and loath to doo 
the divels anie wrong, gave sentence, that the hangmans soule should 
returne to his bodie, untill he had made sufficient satisfaction ; 
ordeining that the pope should set foorth a publike forme of praier 
for the hangmans soule. It was demanded, who should doo the 
arrand to the popes holines Marie quoth our ladie, that shall yon- 
The preesis (jer Dreest that lurketh behind the tree. The preest being called 
arse made . , 
buttons. foorth, and injoined to make relation hereof, and to desire the pope 
to take the paines to doo according to this decree, asked by what 
token he should be directed. Then was delivered unto him a rose 
of such beautie, as when the pope saw it, he knew his message was 
true. And so, if they doo not well, I praie God we may./ 
532- 
The xxvii. Chapter. 
Our B. la- 
dies favor. 
(* p. 
Greg. 4. dia- 
log, cap. 51. 
A I ex and lib. 
5. cap. 23. <^ 
lib. 2. cap. 9. 
A confutation of the fable of the hangman, of manie other feined 
and ridiculous tales and apparitions, with a reproofs thereof. 
jY the tale above mentioned you see what it is to worship 
the image of our ladie. For though we kneele to God 
himselfe, and make never so humble petitions unto him, 
without faith and repentance, it shall doo us no pleasure 
at all. Yet this hangman had great freendship shewed him for one 
point of courtesie used to our ladie, having not one dramme of faith, 
repentance, nor yet of honestie in him. Neverthelesse, so credulous 
is the nature of man, as to beleeve this and such like fables : yea, 
to discredit such stuffe, is thought among the papists flat heresie. 
And though we that are protestants will not beleeve these toies, 
being so apparentlie popish : yet we credit and report other appear- 
ances, and assuming of bodies by soules and spirits ; though they 
be as prophane, absurd, and impious as the other. We are sure the 
holie maide of Kents vision was a verie cousenage : but we can 
credit, imprint, and publish for a true possession or historic, the 
knaverie used by a cousening varlot at Maidstone ;* and manie other 
such as that was. We thinke soules and spirits may come out of 
heaven or hell, and assume bodies, beleeving manie absurd tales told 
by the schoolemen and Romish doctors to that effect : but we dis-

--- PAGE 545 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 27. 
447 
cred't all the stones that they, and as grave men as they are, tell us 
upon their knowledge and credit, of soules condemned to purgatorie, 
wandering for succour and release by trentals and masses said by a 
popish preest, &c : and yet they in probabilitie are equall, and in 
number farre exceed the other. 
We thinke that to be a lie, which is written, or rather fathered upon 
Luther ; to wit, that he knew the divell, and was verie conversant 
with him, and had eaten manie bushels of salt and made jollie good 
cheere with him ; and that he was confuted in a/ disputation with a 
reall divell' about the abolishing of private masse. Neither doo we 
beleeve this report, that the divell in the likenes of a tall man, was 
present at a sermon openlie made by Carolostadhis ; and from this 
sermon went to his house, and told his sonne that he would fetch 
him awaie after a daie or twaine : as the papists saie he did in deed, 
although they lie in everie point thereof most maliciouslie. But we 
can beleeve Platiiia and others, when they tell us of the appearances 
of pope Benedict the eight, and also the ninth ; how the one rode 
upon a blacke horsse in the wildernesse, requiring a bishop (as I 
remember) whome he met, that he would distribute certeine monie 
for him, which he had purloined of that which was given in almes to 
the poore, &c : and how the other was scene a hundred yeares after 
the divell had killed him in a wood, of an heremite, in a beares 
skinne, and an asses head on his shoulders, &c : himselfe saieng 
that he appeared in such sort as he lived. And diverse such stuffe 
rehearseth Platuia. 
Now bicause S. Ambrose writeth, that S. Anne appeared to Con- 
stance the daughter of Constaniine, and to hir parents watching at 
hir sepulchre : and bicause Eiisebhis and Nicephorus saie, that the 
Pontamian virgine. Origins disciple, appeared to S. Basil, and put a 
crowne upon his head, in token of the glorie of his martyrdome, 
which should shortlie followe : and bicause Hierome writeth of Patties 
appearance ; and Theodoret, of S. John the Baptist ; and Athanasitts, 
of Amnions, &-'c: manie doo beleeve the same stories and miraculous 
appearances to be true. But few protestants will give credit unto 
such shamefull fables, or anie like them, when they find them written 
in the Legendarie, Festivall, Rosaries of our Ladie, or anie other 
such popish authors. Whereby I gather, that if the protestant 
beleeve some few lies, the papists beleeve a great number. This I 
write, to shew the imperfection of man, how attentive our eares are 
to hearken to tales. And though herein consist no great point of 
faith or infidelitie ; yet let us that professe the gospell take warning 
of papists, not to be carried awaie with everie vaine blast of doctrine: 
but let us cast awaie these prophane and old wives fables. And 
Greg, lib. 4. 
dialog, ca. 40. 
idem cap. 55, 
and in o- 
ther places 
elsewhere 
innumera- 
ble. 
Micha. And. 
thes. 151. 
533- 
382. 
Alex, ab A- 
lexand. lib. 4. 
genealog. die- 
ruvi. cap. rg. 
Phitarch. 
oratione ad 
Apolloniiim. 
Item. Basili- 
ens. in epist. 
Platina de 
vitis ponti- 
Naticlerus. 2 
general. 35. 
Ambr. ser. 90 
de passione 
Agn. 
Euseh. lib. 
eccles. hist- 5. 
Niceph. lib. 5 
cap. 7. 
Hieronym. 
in vita Pan. 
Theodor. lib. 
hist. 5. ca. 24. 
Athan. in 
vita A mho.

