at great matters may be wrought by this 
art, when princes esteeme and mainteine 
it : of divers woonderfull experiments, 
and of strange conclusions in glasses, of 
the art perspective, &c. pag. 315. 
A comparison betwixt Pharaos magicians 
and our witches, and how their cunning 
consisted in juggling knacks. pag. 317. 
That the serpents and frogs were trulie pre- 
sented, and the water poisoned indeed by 
Jannes and Jambres, of false prophets, and 
of their miracles, of Balams asse. pag. 318

--- PAGE 93 ---
The Contents. 
XXXV 
The art of juggling discovered, and in 
what points it dooth principallie consist, 
pag. 321. 
Of the ball, and the manner of legierde- 
maine therwith, also notable feats with 
one or diverse balles. pag. 322. 
II To make a little ball swell in your hand 
till it be verie great, p. 323. To con- 
sume (or rather to conveie) one or manie 
balles into nothing, pag. 324. How to rap 
a wag upon the knuckles. pag. 324. 
Of conveiance of monie. pag. 324. 
^ To conveie monie out of one of your 
hands into the other by legierdemaine. 
pag. 325. To convert or tran.substantiate 
monie into counters, or counters into 
monie. pag. 325. To put one tester inte 
one hand, and an other into the other 
hand, and with words to bring them to- 
gither. pag. 325. To put one testor into a 
strangers hand, and another into your 
owne, and to conveie both into the 
strangers hand with words, pag. 326. How 
to doo the same or the like feat otherwise, 
pa. 326. To throwe a peece of monie 
awaie, and to find it againe where you 
list. pag. 326. With words to make a 
groat or a testor to leape out of a pot, or 
to run alongst upon a table, pag. 327. To 
make a groat or a testor to sinke through 
a table, and to vanish out of a handkercher 
verie strangelie. pag. 327. 
A notable tricke to transforme a counter to a 
groat. pag. 328. 
An excellent feat, to make a two penie peece 
lie plaine in the palme of your hand, and 
to be passed from thence when you list, 
pag. _ 329. 
If To conveie a testor out of ones hand that 
holdeth it fast. pag. 329. To throwe a 
peece of monie into a deepe pond, and to 
fetch it againe from whence you list, 
pag- . 330./ 
To conveie one shilling being in one hand 
into an other, holding your armes abroad 
like a rood. pag. 330. How to rap a wag 
on the knuckles, pag. 330. 
To transforme anie one small thing into anie 
other forme by folding of paper, pag. 331. 
Of cards, with good cautions how to avoid 
cousenage therein : speciall rules to con- 
veie and handle the cards, and the maner 
and order how to accomplish all difficult 
and strange things wrought by cards, 
pag- . 331- 
TI How to deliver out foure aces, and to con- 
vert them into foure knaves, pag. 333. How 
to tell one what card he seeth in the bot- 
tome, when the same card is shuffled into 
the stocke, pag. 334. An other waie to doo 
the same, having your selfe indeed never 
seene the card. pag. 334. To tell one with- 
out confederacie what card he thinketh, 
pag- 334. 
How to tell what card anie man thinketh, 
how to conveie the same into a kernell of 
a nut or cheristone, &c : and the same 
againe into ones pocket : how to make one 
drawe the same or anie card you list, and 
all under one devise. pag. 335. 
Of fast or loose, how to knit a hard knot 
upon a handkercher, and to undoo the 
same with words. p. 336. 
H A notable feat of fast or loose, namelie, to 
pull three headstones from off" a cord, 
while you hold fast the ends thereof, with- 
out remooving of your hand. pag. 337. 
Juggling knacks by confederacie, and how 
to know whether one cast crosse or pile by 
the ringing. pag. 338. 
H To make a shoale of goslings drawe a tim- 
ber log. pag. 338. To make a pot or anie 
such thing standing fast on the cupboord, 
to fall downe thense by vertue of words, 
pag. 338. To* one danse naked, pag. 339, [*make] 
To transforme or alter the colour of ones 
cap or hat. pag. 339. How to tell where a 
stollen horsse is become. pag. 339. 
Boxes to alter one graine into another, or to 
consume the graine or come to nothing, 
pag. 340. 
tI How to conveie (with words or charmes) 
the corne conteined in one boxe into an 
other, pag. 340. Of an other boxe to con- 
vert wheat into flower with words, &c. 
pag. 341. Of diverse petie juggling knacks, 
pag. 341- 
To burne a thred, and to make it whole 
againe with the ashes thereof. pag. 341. 
To cut a lace asunder in the middest, and 
to make it whole againe. pag. 342. How 
to pull laces innumerable out of your 
mouth, of what colour or length you listj 
and never anie thing seene to be therein, 
pag. 343- 
How to make a booke, wherein you shall 
shew everie leafe therein to be white, 
blacke, blew, red, yellow, greene, &c. 
pag. . 343- 
Desperate or dangerous juggling knacks, 
wherin the simple are made to thinke, 
that a seelie juggler with words can hurt 
and helpe, kill and revive anie creature 
at his pleasure: and first to kill anie [Ss. vi.] 
kind of pullen, and to give it life againe. 
pag. 346. 
H To eate a knife, and to fetch it out of anie 
other place, pag. 346. To thrust a bodkin 
into your head without hurt. pag. 347. To 
thrust a bodkin through your toong, and 
a knife through your arme: a pittiful sight, 
without hurt or danger, pag. 347. To 
thrust a peece of lead into one eie, and to 
drive it about (with a sticke) betweene the 
.skin and flesh of the forehead, untill it be 
brought to the other eie, and there thrust 
out. pag. 348. To cut halfe your nose 
asunder, and to heale it againe presentlie 
without anie salve. pag. 348 / 
To put a ring through your cheeke. pag, 348. [Ss vi. v. J 
To cut off ones head, and to laie it in a 
platter, &c : which the juglers call the 
decollation of John Baptist, pag. 349. To 
thrust a dagger or bodkin in your guts 
verie strangelie, and to recover immediat- 
lie. pag. 350. To draw a cord through 
your nose, mouth or hand, so sensiblie as it 
is wonderfuU to see. pag- 3St. 
The conclusion wherein the reader is referred 
to certeine patterns of instruments where- 
with diverse feats here specified are to be 
executed. pag. 3Si-

--- PAGE 94 ---
xxxvi 
The Contents. 
*\ The xiiii. Bookc. 
C\ F the art of Alcumysterie, of their woords 
^ of art and devises to bleare mens eies, 
and to procure credit to their profession, 
Pag. 353- 
[S s. iii.] The Alcumysters drift, the Chanons yeomans 
tale, of alcumystical stones and waters, 
pag- , ^ 355- 
Of a yeoman of the countne cousened by an 
Alcumyst. ' pag. 357. 
A certeine king abused by an Alcumyst, 
and of the kings foole a pretie jest, 
pag. 360. 
A notable storie written by Erasmus of two 
Alcumysts, also of longation and curtation. 
pag. 361. 
The opinion of diverse learned men touching 
the follie of Alcumystrie. V^Z,- 3^^- 
That vaine and deceitfull hope is a great 
cause why men are seduced by this allur- 
ing art, and that there labours therein are 
bootelesse, &c. pag. 371. 
A continuation of the former matter, with a 
conclusion of the same. p. 372. 
H Tlie XV. Booke. 
'X' He exposition of lidoni, and where it is 
•'■ found, whereby the whole art of conjur- 
ation is deciphered. Pag. 376. 
An inventarie of the names, shapes, powers, 
governement, and effects of divels and 
spirits, of their severall segniorities and 
degrees : a strange discourse woorth the 
reading. p. 377. 
The houres wherein principall divels may be 
bound ; to wit, raised and restrained from 
dooing of hurt. p. 393. 
The forme of adjuring or citing of the spirits 
aforesaid to arise & appeare. page. 393. 
A confutation of the manifold vanities con- 
teined in the precedent chapters, speciallie 
of commanding of divels. pag. 396. 
The names of the planets, their characters, 
togither with the twelve signes of the 
zodiake, their dispositions, a.spects, and 
government, with other observations, 
pag. , 397- 
nl The twelve signes of the zodiake, their 
characters and denominations, &c. pag. 
397. Their dispositions or inclinations. 397. 
^'he disposition of the planets, pag. 398. 
The aspects of the planets. 398. How the 
daie is divided or distinguished. 398. The 
division of the daie, and the planetarie 
regiment, pag. 399. The division of the 
night, and the planetarie regiment, 
pag. 399- 
The characters of the angels of the seven 
dales, with their names : of figures, scales 
and periapts. pag- 400. 
An experiment of the dead. p^g. 401. 
A licence for Sibylla to go and come by at 
all times. pag. 407. 
To know of treasure hidden in the earth, 
pag. _ 408. 
If This is the waie to go invisible by these 
three sisters of fairies. 408. 
An experiment of Citrael, &c : aiigeli diei 
dn)ininci. pag. 410. 
H The seven angels of the seven daies, with 
the praier zaWedJicghia lingita;. pag. 410. 
How to inclose a spirit in a christall stone. 
pag. 411 / 
A figure or type proportionall, shewing what 
forme must be observed and kept, in mak- 
ing the figure whereby the former secret 
of inclosing a spirit in christall is to be ac- 
complished, &c. pag. 414. 
An experiment of Bealphares. pag. 415. 
^ The twoo and twentieth Psalme. pag. 416. 
This psalme also following, being the fiftie 
one psalme, must be said three times over, 
&c. pag. 416. 
To bind the spirit Bealphares, and to lose 
him againe. pag. 418. 
H A licence for the spirit to depart, pag. 4t9. 
A type or figure of the circle for the maister 
and his fellowes to sit in. shewing how & 
after what fashion it should be made, 
pag. _ 420. 
The making of the holie water pag. 421. 
^ To the water sale also as followeth. pag. 
421. Then take the salt in thy hand, and 
saie putting it into the water, making in 
the maner of a crosse. pag. 421. Then 
sprinkle upon anie thing, and saie as fol- 
loweth. pag. 422. 
To make a spirit to appeare in a christall. 
pag. _ 422. 
An experiment of the dead. pag. 423. 
^ Now the Pater noster, Ave, and Credo 
must be said, and then the praier imme- 
diatlie following. p. 425. 
A bond to bind him to thee, and to thy N. 
as followeth. pag. 425. 
^ This bod as followeth, is to call him into 
your christall stone, or glasse, &c. pag. 
428. Then being appeared, saie these 
words following, pag. 429. A licence to 
depart. pag. 429. 
When to talke with spirits, and to have true 
answers to find out a theefe. pag. 430. 
*!! To speake with spirits. pag. 430. 
A confutation of conjuration, especiallie 
of the raising, binding and dismissing of 
the divell, of going invisible and other 
lewd practises. pag. 430. 
A comparison betweene popish exorcists and 
other conjurors, a popish conjuration 
published by a great doctor of the 
Romish church, his rules and cautions, 
pag. _ _ _ 433- 
A late experiment, or cousenmg conjuration 
practised at Orleance by the Franciscane 
Friers, how it was delected, and the 
judgement against the authors of that 
comedie. pag. 435. 
Who may be conjurors in the Romish church 
besides priests, a ridiculous definition of 
superstition, what words are to be used 
and not used in exorcismes, rebaptisme 
allowed, it is lawful! to conjure any thing, 
differences betweene holie water and con- 
juration, pag. 438. 
The seven reasons why some are not rid of 
the divell with all their popish conjura- 
tions, why there were no cojurors in the 
primitive church, and why the divell is

--- PAGE 95 ---
The Contents. 
xxxvii 
not SO soone cast out of the bewitched as 
of the possessed. pag. 441. 
Other grosse absurdities of witchmongers in 
this matter of conjurations. pag. 443. 
Certaine conjurations talien out of the pon- 
tificall and out of the missall. pag. 444. 
H A conjuration written in the masse booke. 
Fol. I. pag. 145. Oremus. _ pag. 445. 
That popish priests leave nothing uncon- 
jured, a forme of e.xorcisme for incense, 
pag. . 446- 
The rules and lawes of popish E.xorcists and 
other conjurors all one, with a confutation 
of their whole power, how S. Martine con- 
jured the divell. _ pag. 447. 
That it is a shame for papists to bcleeve 
other conjurors dooings, their owne being 
of so litle force, Hippocrates his opinion 
herein. _ _ pag. 450-/ 
How conjurors have beguiled witches, what 
bookes they carie about to procure credit 
to their art, wicked assertions against 
Moses and Joseph. pag. 451. 
All magicall arts confuted by an argument 
concernin T Nero, what Cornelius Agrippa 
and Carolus Gallus have left written ther- 
of, and prooved by experience, pag. 452. 
Of Salomons conjurations, and of the opinion 
conceived of his cunning and practise 
therein. pag 454. 
Lessons read in all churches, where the pope 
hath authoritie, on Saint Margarets dale, 
translated into English word for word, 
pag. 455- 
A delicate storie of a Lombard, who by 
saint Margarets example would needs 
fight with a reall divell. pag. 457. 
The storie of S. Margaret prooved to be 
both ridiculous and impious in everie 
point. pag. 459. 
A pleasant miracle wrought by a popish 
preest. pag. 460. 
The former miracle confuted, with a strange 
storie of S. Lucie. _ pag 461. 
Of visions, noises, apparitions, and imagined 
sounds, and of other illusions, of wander- 
ing soules : with a confutation thereof, 
pag. . 461. 
Cardanus opinion of strange noises, how 
counterfet visions grow to be credited, of 
popish appeerances, of pope Boniface, 
pag. 464- 
Of the noise or sound of eccho, of one that 
narrowlie escaped drowning thereby &c. 
pag 465- 
Of Theurgie, with a confutation therof, a 
letter sent to me concerning these matters, 
pag. 466. 
H The copie of a letter sent unto me R. S. 
by T. E. Maister of art, and practiser 
both of physicke, and also in times past, 
of certeine vaine sciences ; now condemned 
to die for the same ; wherein he openeth 
the truth touching these deceits, pag. 467. 
^ The xvi. Booke. 
A Conclusion, in maner of an epilog, re- 
peating nianie of the former absurdities 
of witchmongers conceipts, confutations 
thereof, and of the authoritie of James 
Sprenger and Henry Institor inquisitors 
and compilers of M. Mai. Pa. 470. 
By what meanes the common people have 
beene made beleeve in the miraculous 
works of witches, a' definition of witch- 
craft, and a description thereof, pag. 47r. 
Reasons to proove that words and characters 
are but babies, and that witches cannot doo 
such things as the multitude supposeth 
they can, their greatest woonders prooved 
trifles, of a yoong gentleman cousened. 
pag. 473- 
Of one that was so bewitched that he could 
read no scriptures but canonicall, of a 
divell that could speake no Latine, a 
proofe that witchcraft is flat cousenage. 
pag. _ _ 476. 
Of the divination by the sive & sheeres, and 
by the booke and key, Hemingius his [S s vii. v.] 
opinion thereof confuted, a bable to know 
what is a clocke, of certeine jugling 
knacks, manifold reasons for the over- 
throwe of witches and conjurors, and their 
cousenages, of the divels transformations, 
of Ferrnin catufejis^ ^c. pag. 477. 
How the divell preached good doctrine in the 
shape of a preest, how he was discovered, 
and that it is a shame (after confutation of 
the greater witchcrafts) for anie man to 
give credit to the lesser points thereof, 
pag. _ 48r. 
A conclusion against witchcraft, in maner 
and forme of an Induction. pag. 483. 
Of naturall witchcraft or fascination, pag. 484. 
Of inchanting or bewitching eies. pag. 485./ 
Of naturall witchcraft for love, &c. pag. 487. [Ss. viii.] 
A Discourse upon divels and spirits, and 
first of philosophers opinions, also the 
maner of their reasoning hereupon, and 
the same confuted. Pag. 489. 
Mine owne opinion concerning this argu- 
ment,to the disproofe of some writers here- 
upon, pag. 491. 
The opinion of Psellus touching spirits, of 
their severall orders, and a confutation of 
his errors therein. pag. 492. 
More absurd assertions of Psellus and such 
others, concerning the actions and passions 
of spirits, his definition of them, and of 
his experience therein. pag. 495. 
The opinion of Fascius Cardanus touching 
spirits, and of his familiar divell. pag. 497. 
The opinion of Plato concerning spirits, 
divels and angels, what sacrifices they 
like best, what they feare, and of Socrates 
his familiar diveU. _ _ pag. 498. 
Platos nine orders of spirits and angels, 
Dionysius his division thereof not much 
differing from the same, all disprooved by 
learned divines. pag- 500. 
The commensement of divels fondlie gathered 
out of the 74. of Isaie, of Lucifer and of 
his fall, the Cabalists the Thalmudists 
and Schoolemens opinions of the creation 
of angels. pag. sor. 
Of the cotention betweene the Greeke and

--- PAGE 96 ---
xxxviii 
The Contents. 
Latine church touching the fall of angels, 
the variance among papists themselves 
[S s viii. v.] herein, a conflict betweene Michael and 
Lucifer. pag. 503. 
Where the battell betweene Michael and 
Lucifer was fought, how long it continued, 
and of their power, how fondiie papists 
and infidels write of them, and how rever- 
entlie Christians ought to thinke of them, 
p. . . 504- 
Whether they became divels which being 
angels kept not their vocation, in Jude 
and Peter ; of the fond opinions of the 
Rabbms touching spirits and bugs, with a 
confutation thereof. pag. 506. 
That the divels assaults are spirituall and 
not temporall, and how grosselie some 
understand those parts of the scripture, 
pag. _ _ 508. 
The equivocation of this word spirit, how 
diverslie it is taken in the scriptures, where 
(by the waie) is taught that the scripture 
is not alwaies literallie to be interpreted, 
nor yet allegoricallie to be understood, 
pa. 509. 
That it pleased God to manifest the power 
of his Sonne and not of witches by mira- 
cles, pag. 512. 
Of the possessed with devils. pag. 513. 
That we being not throughlie informed of 
the nature of divels and spirits, must 
satisfie our selves with that which is di- 
livered us in the scriptures touching the 
same, how this word divell is to be under- 
stood both in the singular & plurall num- 
ber, of the spirit of God and the spirit of 
the divell, of tame spirits, of Ahab pag. 154. 
Whether spirits and soules can assume 
bodies, and of their creation and substance, 
wherein writers doo extreamelie contend 
and varie. pag. 516. 
Certeine popish reasons concerning spirits 
made of aier, of dale divels and night 
divels, and why the divell loveth no salt 
in his meate. pag. 517. 
That such divels as are mentioned in the 
scriptures, have in their names their na- 
ture and qualities expressed, with in- 
stances thereof. pag. 518. 
[* Pneuma-] Diverse names of the divell, whereby his 
nature and disposition is manifested, 
pag. 520. 
That the idols or gods of the Gentiles are 
divels, their diverse names, and/ in what 
affaires their labours and authorities are 
emploied, wherein also the blind supersti- 
tion of the heathen people is discovered, 
pag. 521. 
Of the Romans cheefe gods called Dii se- 
lecti, and of other heathen gods, their 
names and offices. pag. 523. 
Of diverse gods in diverse countries. 
Of popish provincial! gods, a comparison be- 
tweene them and heathen gods, of physi- 
call gods, and of what occupation everie 
popish god is. pag. 526. 
A comparison betweene the heathen and 
papists, touching their excuses for idola- 
trie. _ pag. 529. 
The conceipt of the heathen and the papists 
all one in idolatrie, of the councell of 
Trent, a notable storie of a hangman 
arraigned after he was dead and buried, 
&c. _ pag. 530. 
A confutation of the fable of the hangman, 
of manie other feined and ridiculous tales 
and apparitions, with a reproofe thereof, 
pag- . 532- 
A confutation of Johannes Laurentius, and 
of manie others, mainteining these fained 
and ridiculous tales and apparitions, & 
what driveth them awaie ; of Moses and 
Helias appearance in Mount Thabor. 
. P^S-^ . . 534- 
A confutation of assuming of bodies, and of 
the serpent that seduced Eve. pag. 536. 
The objection concerning the divels assum- 
ing of the serpents bodie answered. 
^ pag- 537- 
Of the cursse rehearsed Genes. 3. and that 
place rightlie expounded, John Calvines 
opinion of the divell. pag. 539- 
Mine owne opinion and resolution of the 
nature of spirits, and of the divell, with his 
properties. pag. 540. 
Against fond witchmongers, and their 
opinions concerning corporall divels. 
pag- .... 542- 
A conclusion wherin the Spirit of spirits is 
described, by the illumination of which 
spirit all spirits are to be tried : with a 
confutation of the Pneutomachi' flatlie de- 
nieng the divinitie of this Spirit, pag. 543. 
FINIS. 
^ Imprinted at London by 
William Brome. 
[These Contents in original end the book as do our Indices.]

--- PAGE 97 ---
Appendix I. 
\Ch. I to 9 affixed to the i^th Book in Ed. 1665.] 
Chap. 
I. r\F Magical Circles, and the reason of 
their Institution. 215 
II. Horn to raise up the Ghost of one that 
hath hanged himself. 217 
III. How to raise up tlu: three Spirits, 
Paymon, Bathin, and Barma ; and ivhat 
■wonderful tilings may be effected through 
their A ssistance. 218 
IV. H01U to co7isecrate all ^najiner of Circles, 
Fumigations, Fires, Magical Garments, 
and Utensils. 220 
V. Treating more practically of the Conse- 
Page. 
oration of Circles, Fires, Garments and 
Fumigations. 221 
VI. How to raise and exorcise all sorts of 
Spirits belonging to the A iry Region. 222 
VII. HoTV to obtai7i the familiarity of the 
Genius, or Good Angel, and cattse him to 
appear. 223 
VIII. A form of Conjuring Luridan the 
Familiar, otherwise called Belelah. 224 
IX. How to conjure the Spirit Balkin tite 
Master of Luridan. 226 
Appendix II. 
[Secojid Book of A Discourse on Devils and Spirits^ 
Book II. 
Chap. 
I. y~)F Spirits iit general^ what tliey are,, 
a7id how to be considered, also how 
far the power of Magiiians aiid Witches^ 
is able to operate in Diabolical Ma~ 
gick. 39 
II. Of the good and evil Dsemons or Genii ; 
whether they are^ what they are^ and how 
they are ma7iifested\ also of their names, 
powers, faculties^ offices, how they are to 
be co7tsidered, 42 
III. Of the Astral Spirits of Men de- 
parted ; what they are, a7id why tliey ap- 
pear again, aiid what witchcraft may be 
wrought by them. 45* 
Page. 
IV. Of astral spirits, or separate daemons in 
all their distinctions, najnes, &^ natures, 
and places of habitaiio7is, <£r' what jnay be 
wroztght by their assistaiice. 49 
V. Of the Infernal Spirits, or Devils, &^ 
damned souls, treating what their na- 
ttires, names, powers are. 56. 
VI. Of the nature, force, &^ forms of 
charms, periapts, amulets, pentodes, con- 
juratio7is, ceremonies, &^c. 66 
VII. Being the conclusion of the whole^ 
wherein divers a^icient spells, cltarjus, 
incantatio7is, a7id exorcisms, are briefly 
spoken of. 68 
THE END.

--- PAGE 99 ---
The discoverie of Witchcraft. 
^ The first Booke. 
The first Chapter. 
An wipeachment of Witches power in meteors and elementarie bodies 
tending to the rebuke of snch as attribute too much unto them. 
[HE fables of Witchcraft have taken so fast hold and deepe 
root in the heart of man, that fewe or none can (nowa- 
daies) with patience indure the hand and correction of 
God. For if any adversitie, greefe, sicknesse, losse of 
children, corne, cattell, or libertie happen vnto them ; by & by 
they exclaime uppon witches. As though there were no God in 
Israel that ordereth all things according to his will ; punishing both 
just and unjust with greefs, plagues, and afflictions in maner and 
forme as he thinketh good : but that certeine old women heere on 
earth, called witches, must needs be the contrivers of all mens 
calamities, and as though they themselves were innocents, and had 
deserved no such punishments. Insomuch as they sticke not to ride 
and go to such, as either are injuriouslie tearmed witches, or else are 
willing so to be accounted, seeking at their hands comfort and remedie 
in time of their tribulation, contrarie to Gods will and commandement 
in that behalfe, who bids us resort to him in all / our necessities. 
Such faithlesse people (I sale) are also persuaded, that neither 
haile nor snowe, thunder nor lightening, raine nor tempestuous winds 
come from the heavens at the commandement of God : but are raised 
by the cunning and power of witches and conjurers ; insomuch as a 
clap of thunder, or a gale of wind is no sooner heard, but either they 
run to ring bels, or crie out to burne witches ; or else burne consecrated 
things, hoping by the smoke thereof, to drive the divell out of the 
aire, as though spirits could be fraied awaie with such externall toies : 
howbeit, these are right inchantments, as Brentiiis affirmeth. 
But certeinlie, it is neither a witch, nor divell, but a glorious* God 
that maketh the thunder. I have read in the scriptures, that God'' 
maketh the blustering tempests and whirlewinds : and I find that it 
is'= the Lord that altogither dealeth with them, and that they'^ blowe 
according to his will. But let me see anie of them all^ rebuke and 
still the sea in time of tempes