the Duke of Alba his horsse was consecrated, or canonized, them small 
in the lowe countries, at the solemne masse ; wherein the popes bull, thiTpraier.' 
and also his charme was published (which I will hereafter recite) he 
in the meane time sitting as Vice-roy with his consecrated standard 
in his hand, till masse was done. 
T 
^ A chartne against vineager. 
Hat wine wax not eager, write on the vessell,'* Giestate £r» videte, I'Ps. 33 g Vuig.: 
qiioniam suavis est Dotninus. bia'sphe'-'^ 
D D

--- PAGE 300 ---
202 
12, Booke. 
TJie discoverie 
Psal. 58. 
250. 
Virg. iclog. 8. 
Ovid, meta- 
mor. 7. 
Jerem. 8. 17. 
181. 
The XV. Chapter. 
The inchmtting of serpents and snakes., objections atmswered con- 
cerning the same j fo7id reasons whie charmes take effect therin, 
Mahoinets pigeoji, miracles wrought by an Asse at Memphis in 
Aegypt, popish charmes against serpents, of miracle workers, the 
taineing of snakes, Bodins lie of snakes. 
ONCERNING the charming of serpents and snakes, 
mine adversaries (as I have said) thinke they have great 
advantage by tlie words of David in the fiftie eight 
psalme ; and by feremie, chapter eight, expounding 
the one prophet by Virgil, the other by Ovid. For the words of 
David are these ; Their poison is Hke the poison of a serpent, and 
hke a deafe adder, that stoppeth his/ eare, and heareth not the voice 
of the charmer, charme he never so cunninglie. The words of Virgil 
are these, Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur angt/is. As he might 
saie, David thou liest ; for the cold natured snake is by the charmes 
of the inchanters broken all to peeces in the field where he lieth. 
Then commeth Ovid, and he taketh his countriemans part, saieng in 
the name and person of a witch ; Vipereas rumpo verbis &^ carmine 
fauces ; that is, I with my words and charmes can breake in sunder 
the vipers jawes. Marrie feremie on the other side encountereth 
this poeticall witch, and he not onelie defendeth, but expoundeth his 
fellowe prophets words, and that not in his owne name, but in the 
name of almightie God ; saieng, I will send serpents and cockatrices 
among you, which cannot be charmed. 
Now let anie indifferent man (christian or heathen) judge, whether 
the words and minds of the prophets doo not directlie oppugne these 
poets words (I will not saie minds :) for that I am sure they did therein 
but jest and trifle, according to the common fabling of lieng poets. 
And certeinlie, I can encounter them two with other two poets ; 
namelie Propertitis and Horace, the one merrilie deriding, the other 
seriouslie impugning their fantasticall poetries, concerning the power 
and omnipotencie of witches. For where Virgil, Ovid, : write 
that witches with their charmes fetch downe the moone and starres 
from heaven, etc. ; Propertius mocketh them in these words fol- 
lowing : / 
At vos deductcE quibus est fallacia Luna, 
Et labor in magicis sacra piare focis, 
En ageduni dominm mentem convertite nostra', 
Ef facite ilia meo palleat ore magis,

--- PAGE 301 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 15. 
Tunc ego crediderim vobis sidera &-» amnes 
Posse Circeis ducere carminibtis : 
But yott that have the subtill slight, 
0/fetchmg downe the inoone from skies j 
And with inchanting fier bright. 
Attempt to purge your sacrifies: 
Lo now, go to, turne [if you can) 
Our madams 7nind and sturdie hart, I 
And make hir face more pale and wan, 
Tha7t mine : which if by magicke art 
You doo, then will I soone beleeve, 
That by your witching charmes you can 
From skies aloft the starres remeeve. 
And rivers turne from whence they I'an. 
And that you may see more certeinlie, that these poets did but jest 
and deride the credulous and timerous sort of people, I thought 
good to shew you what Ovid saith against himselfe, and such as have 
written so incrediblie and ridiculouslie of witches omnipotencie : 
Englished by 
Abraham 
Fleming. 
251. 
Nec medicE magicis finduntur cantibus angues, 
Nec redit in fontes unda supina suos : 
Snakes in the middle are not riven 
ivith charmes of witches cunning. 
Nor waters to their fountaines driven 
by force of backward running. 
Englished by 
Abraliam 
Fleming. 
As for Horace his verses I omit them, bicause I have cited them in 
another place. And concerning this matter Cardanus saith, that at Card. lib. 15. 
everie eclipse they were woont to thinke, that witches pulled downe ^a/.'so."'^' 
the sunne and moone from heaven. And doubtles, hence came the 
opinion of that matter, which spred so farre, and continued so long in 
the common peoples mouthes, that in the end learned men grew to 
beleeve it, and to affirme it in writing. 
But here it will be objected, that bicause it is said (in the places by 
me alledged) that snakes or vipers cannot be charmed ; Ergo other 
things may : To answer this argument, I would aske the witchmonger 
this question, to wit ; Whether it be expedient, that to satisfie his 
follie, the Holie-ghost must of necessitie make mention of everie 
particular thing that he imagineth may be bewitched ? I w^ould also 
aske of him, what privilege a snake hath more than other creatures, 
that he onelie may not, and all other creatures may be bewitched ? 
An objecti- 
on answe- 
red.

--- PAGE 302 ---
204 ij.Booke. - The discoverie 
182. I hope they will not sale, that either/ their faith or infidelitie is the 
cause thereof ; neither doo I admit the answer of such divines as saie, 
252. that he cannot be bewitched ;/ for that he seduced Eve ; by meanes 
whereof God himselfe curssed him ; and thereby he is so privileged, 
as that no witches charme can take hold of him. But more shall be 
said hereof in the sequele. 
Dan. in dia- DaticEils saith, that witches charmes take soonest hold upon snakes 
OS- caf. 3. adders ; bicause of their conference and familiaritie with the 
divell, whereby the rather mankind through them was seduced. Let 
us seeke then an answer for this cavill ; although in truth it needeth 
not : for the phrase of speach is absolute, & importes not a speciall 
qualitie proper to the nature of a viper anie more, than when I saie ; 
A connie cannot flie: you should gather & conclude thereupon, that 
I ment that all other beasts could flie. But you shall understand, that 
the cause why these vipers can rather withstand the voice & practise 
of inchanters and sorcerers, than other creatures, is: for that they 
being in bodie and nature venomous, cannot so soone or properlie 
receive their destruction by venome, wherby the witches in other 
creatures bring their mischeefous practises more easilie to passe, 
according to Virgils saieng 
VjVg. geo. 4. Corrnpitqiie lacus, infecit pabula tabo, 
Mmham ^^'^ infect with poison strong 
Fleming. Both ponds and pastures all along. 
And thereupon the prophet alludeth unto their corrupt and in- 
flexible nature, with that comparison: and not (as Tremelius is faine 
to shift it) with stopping one eare with his taile, and laieng the other 
close to the ground ; bicause he would not heare the charmers voice. 
For the snake hath neither such reason ; nor the words such effect: 
otherwise the snake must know our thoughts. It is also to be con- 
sidered, how untame by nature these vipers (for the most part) are ; 
in so much as they be not by mans Industrie or cunning to be made 
familiar, or traind to doo anie thing, whereby admiration male be 
Feaieshis procured: Z.S Bomelio Feates\i\s Ao^zovX^Aoo ; or Afahotnets pigeon, 
Mahomets which would resort unto him, being in the middest of his campe, and 
pigeon. picke a pease out of his eare ; in such sort that manie of the people 
thought that the Holie-ghost came and told him a tale in his eare: 
the same pigeon also brought him a scroll, wherein was written, Hex 
esto, and laid the same in his necke. And bicause I have spoken of 
2JJ. the doci/litie of a dog and a pigeon, though I could cite an infinite 
number of like tales, I will be bold to trouble you but with one 
more.

--- PAGE 303 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 15. 205 
At Memphis in y^^^^/Z, among other juggling knacks, which were 
there usuallie shewed, there was one that tooke such paines with an 
asse, that he had taught him all these qualities following. And for 
gaine he caused a stage to be made, and an assemblie of people to 
meete ; which being done, in the maner of a plaie, he came in with 
his asse, and said ; The Siiltane hath great need of asses to helpe to 
Carrie stones and other stuffe, towards his great building which he 
hath in hand. The asse im/mediallie fell downe to the ground, and 
by all signes shewed himselfe to be sicke, and at length to give up 
the ghost : so as the juggler begged of the assemblie monie towards 
his losse. And having gotten all that he could, he said ; Now my 
maisters, you shall see mine asse is yet alive, and dooth but counter- 
fet ; bicause he would have some monie to buie him provender, 
knowing that I was poore, and in some need of releefe. Hereupon he 
would needs laie a wager, that his asse was alive, who to everie mans 
seeming was starke dead. And when one had laid monie with him 
thereabout, he commanded the asse to rise, but he laie still as though 
he were dead : then did he beate him with a cudgell, but that would 
not serve the turne, untill he addressed this speech to the asse, saieng 
(as before) in open audience ; The Siiltane hath commanded, that 
all the people shall ride out to morrow, and see the triumph, and 
that the faire ladies will then ride upon the fairest asses, and will give 
notable provender unto them, and everie asse .shall drinke of the 
sweete water of Nihis : and then lo the asse did presentlie start up, 
and advance himself^ exceedinglie. Lo (quoth his maister) now I 
have vifonne : but in troth the Maior hath borrowed mine asse, for 
the use of the old ilfavoured witch his wife : and thereupon immediat- 
lie he hoong downe his eares, and halted downe right, as though he 
had beene starke lame. Then said his maister ; I perceive you love 
yoong prettie wenches : at which words he looked up, as it were with 
joifull cheere. And then his maister did bid him go choose one that 
should ride upon him ; and he ran to a verie handsome woman, and 
touched hir with his head : &c. A snake will never be brought to 
such familiaritie, <S:c. Bodin saith, that this was a man in the like- 
nesse of an asse : but I male/ rather thinke that he is an asse in 
the likenesse of a man. Well, to returne to our serpents, I will tell 
you a storie concerning the charming of them, and the event of 
the same. 
In the citie of Salisboivgh there was an inchanter, that before all 
the people tooke upon him to conjure all the serpents and snakes 
within one mile compasse into a great pit or dike, and there to kill 
them. When all tlie serpents were gathered togither, as he stood 
upon the brinke of the pit, there came at the last a great and a 
A storie 
declaring 
ihe great 
docilitie of 
an asse. 
183. 
y. Bed. lib. dc 
dcpm. 2. cap, 6. 
254- 
Mai. male/, 
part 2. qu. 2. 
cap. 9. 
Johii. Bodm.

--- PAGE 304 ---
2o6 
12. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Kxorcismes 
or conjura- 
liess against 184, 
serpents. 
L. Vait. lid. 
de fascinat. 
J. cap. 4. 
255- 
Usurpers of 
kinred with 
blessed 
Paule and 
S Katha- 
horrible serpent, which would not be gotten downe with all the force 
of his incantations : so as (all the rest being dead) he flew upon the 
inchanter, and clasped him in the middest, and drew him downe into 
the said dike, and there killed him. You must thinke that this was 
a divell in a serpents likenesse, which for the love he bare to the 
poore snakes, killed the sorcerer ; to teach all other witches to be- 
ware of the like wicked practise. And surelie, if this be not true, 
there be a great number of lies conteined in M. Mai. and in J. Bodin. 
And if this be well weighed, and conceived, it beateth downe to the 
ground all those witchmongers arguments, that contend to wring 
witching miracles out of this place. For they disagree notablie, some 
denieng and some affirming that serpents male be bewitched. 
Neverthelesse, bicause in everie point you shall see how 'poperie 
agreeth with paganisme, I will recite certeine charmes against vipers, 
allowed for the most part in and by the church of Rome : as 
followeth. 
I conjure thee O serpent in this houre, by the five holie woonds 
of our/ Lord, that thou remove not out of this place, but here stale, 
as certeinelie as God was borne of a pure virgine. Otherwise : 
I conjure thee serpent In nomine patris, &^ filH, ^ spiritus sancti : 
I command thee serpent by our ladie S. Marie, that thou obeie 
me, as wax obeieth the fier, and as fier obeieth water ; that thou 
neither hurt me, nor anie other christian, as certeinelie as God 
was borne of an immaculate virgine, in which respect I take thee 
up, In nomine patris &^ Jilii, spiritus sancti : Ely lash eiter, ely 
lash eiter, ely lash eiter. ifr Otherwise : O vermine, thou must come 
as God came unto the Jewes. Otherwise : L. Vairus saith, 
that Serpens qtiernis frondibus contacta, that a serpent touched with 
oke leaves dieth, and staieth even in the beginning of his going, if 
a feather of the bird Ibis be cast or throwne upon him : and that/ 
a viper smitten or hot with a reed is astonied, and touched with a 
beechen branch is presentlie numme and stiffe. 
Here is to be remembred, that manie use to boast that they are of 
S. Paules race and kinred, shewing upon their bodies the prints of 
serpents : which (as the papists affirme) was incident to all them of 
S. Paules stocke. Marie they sale herewithall, that all his kinsfolks 
can handle serpents, or anie poison without danger. Others likewise 
have (as they brag) a Katharine wheele upon their bodies, and they 
sale they are kin to S. Katharine, and that they can carrie burning 
coles in their bare hands, and dip their said hands in hot skalding 
liquor, and also go into hot ovens. Whereof though the last be but a 
bare jest, and to be doone by anie that will prove (as a bad fellow in 
London had used to doo, making no tariance at all therein :) yet there

--- PAGE 305 ---
of WitcJicraft. chap. 15.' 207 
is a shew made of the other, as though it were certeine and undoubted ; 
by annointing the hands with the juice of mallovves, mercurie, urine, 
&c : which for a httle time are defensatives against these scalding 
liquors, and scortching fiers. 
But they that take upon them to worke these mysteries and 
miracles, doo indeed (after rehearsal! of these and such like words 
and charmes) take up even in their bare hands, those snakes and 
vipers, and sometimes put them about their necks, without receiving 
anie hurt thereby, to the terror and astonishment of the beholders, 
which naturallie both feare and abhorre all serpents. But these char- 
mers (upon my word) dare not trust to their charmes, but use such 
an inchantment, as everie man maie lawfullie use, and in the lawful! 
use thereof maie bring to passe that they shalbe in securitie, and take 
no harme, how much soever they handle them : marie with a woollen 
rag they pull out their teeth before hand, as some men saie ; but as 
truth is, they wearie them, and that is of certeintie. And surelie this is 
a kind of witchcraft, which I terme private confederacie. Bodin 7- Bodin. Ub. 
saith, that all the snakes in one countrie were by charmes and cap. 3. 
verses driven into another region : perhaps he meaneth Ireland., 
where S. Patrike is said to have doone it with his holinesse, &c. 
Jatnes Sprenger, and He^irie Institor afifirme, that serpents and 
snakes, and their skins exceed all other creatures for witchcraft : in 
so mucH as witches doo use to burie them under mens/ threshholds, 2^6. 
either of the house or stalles, whereby barrennes is procured both to 
woman and beast : yea and that the verie earth and ashes of them 
continue to have force of fascination. In respect whereof they wish all 
men now and then to dig/ awaie the earth under their threshholds, and 185. 
to sprinkle hoi ie water in the place, & also tohang boughes (hallowed 
on midsummer dale) at the stall doore where the 
cattell stand : & produce examples thereupon, 
of witches lies, or else their owne, which 
I omit ; bicause I see my booke 
groweth to be greater 
than I meant it 
should 
be.

--- PAGE 306 ---
208 
12, Booke. 
The discoverie 
L. Vatrus lib. 
/asczn. 1. ca, 5. 
Oriitio Tus~ 
ccc vesialis. 
Of the 
word (Bud) 
and the 
Greeke let- 
ters n & A- 
The xvi. Chapter. 
Charmes to carrie water in a sive, to know what is spoken of us behind 
our backs, for bleare eies, to make seeds to growe well, of itnages 
made of wax, to be rid of a witch, to hang hir up, notable 
authorities against waxen images, a storie bewraieng the knaverie 
of waxen images. 
pEONARDUS VAIRUS saith, that there was a praier 
extant, whereby might be carried in a sive, water, or 
other liquor : I thinke it was Clam claie ; which a crow 
i^l taught a maid, that was promised a cake of so great 
quantitie, as might be kneded of so much floure as she could wet 
with the water that she brought in a sive, and by that meanes she 
clamd it with claie, & brought in so much water, as whereby she 
had a great cake, and so beguiled hir sisters, &c. And this tale 
I heard among my grandams maides, whereby I can decipher this 
witchcraft. Item, by the tingling of the eare, men heretofore could tell 
what was spoken of them. If anie see a scorpion, and sale this word 
{Bud) he shall not be stoong or bitten therewith. These two Greeke 
letters n and A written in a paper, and hoong about ones necke, pre- 
serve the partie from bleereiednesse. Cummin orhempseed sowne with 
curssing and opprobrious words grow the faster and the better. Berosus 
Anianus maketh witchcraft of great antiquitie : for he saith, that/ • 
Cham touching his fathers naked member uttered a charme, wherby 
his father became emasculated or deprived of the powers generative. 
1[ A charme teachi7tg how to hurt whom you list with images of 
wax, &r'C. 
MAke an image in his name, whom you would hurt or kill, of new 
virgine wax ; under the right arme poke whereof place a swal- 
lowes hart, and the liver under the left ; then hang about the necke 
thereof a new thred in a new needle pricked into the member which you 
would have hurt, with the rehearsal! of certeine words, which for the 
avoiding of foolish superstition and credulitie in this behalfe is to be 
omitted. And if they were inserted, I dare undertake they would doo 
no harme, were it not to make fooles, and catch gudgins. 4^ Other- 
wise : Sometimes these images are made of brasse, and then the 
hand is placed where the foote should be, and the foote where the 
hand, and the face downeward. -v- Otherwise : For a greater mischeefe.

--- PAGE 307 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. i6. 
the like image is made in the forme of a man or woman, upon whose 
head is written the certeine name of the partie : and on his or hir 
ribs these words, Ailif, easy I, zase, hit! mel Jiieltat : then the same 
must be buried. 4f- Otherwise : In the dominion of Mars, two images 
must be prepared, one of wax, the other of the earth of a dead man ; 
each image must have in his hand a sword wherwith a man hath 
beene slaine, & he that must be slaine may have his head thrust 
through with a foine. In both must be written certeine peculiar 
characters, and then must they be hid in a certeine place. -5> Other- 
wise : To obteine a womans love, an image must be made in the 
houre of Vemis, of virgine wax, in the name of the beloved, wher- 
upon a character is written, & is warmed at a fier, and in dooing 
therof the name of some angell must be mentioned. To be utterlie 
rid of the witch, and to hang hir up by the haire, you must prepare 
an image of the earth of a dead man to be baptised in another mans 
name, whereon the name, with a character, must be written : then 
must it be perfumed with a rotten bone, and then these psalmes read 
backward : Domme Dominus nosier, Dominus illuniinatio viea, Domine 
exaudi orationetn i?ieain, Deiis laudem meam ne tacueris : and then 
burie it, first in one place, and/ afterwards in another. Howbeit, it is 
written in the 21 article of the determination of Paris, that to affirme 
that images of brasse, lead, gold, of white or red wax, or of any 
other stuffe (conjured, baptised, consecrated, or rather execrated 
through these magicall arts at certeine days) have woonderfull vertues, 
.or such as are avowed in their bookes or assertions, is error in faith, 
naturall philosophic, and true astronomie : yea it is concluded in the 
22 article of that councell, that it is as great an error to beleeve 
those things, as to doo them. 
~ But concerning these images, it is certeine that they are much 
feared among the people, and much used among cousening witches, 
as partlie appeereth in this discourse of mine else-where, & as partlie 
you may see by the contents of this storie following. Not long 
sithence, a yoong maiden (dwelling at new Romnie heere in Kent) 
being the daughter of one M. L. Stuppenie (late Jurat of the same 
towne but dead before the execution hereof) and afterwards the 
wife of Thomas Eps, who is at this instant Maior of Romnie) was visited 
with sicknesse, whose mother and father in lawe being abused with 
credulitie concerning witches supernaturall power, repaired to a 
famous witch called mother Baker, dwelling not far from thence at a 
place called Stonstreet, who (according to witches cousening custome) 
asked whether they mistrusted not some bad neighbour, to whom 
they answered that indeed they doubted a woman neere unto them 
(and yet the same woman was, of the honester & wiser sort of hir 
E E 
186. 
The practi- 
ser of these 
charmes 
must have 
skill in the 
planetaria 
motions, or 
else he may 
go shoo the 
goose. 
35s. 
A proved 
storie con- 
cerning the 
premisses.

--- PAGE 308 ---
2 10 
1 2. Booke. 
The discoverie 
neighbors, reputed a good creature.) Nevertheles the witch told 
them that there was great cause of their suspicion : for the same (said 
she) is the verie partie that wrought the maidens destruction, by 
malcing a hart of wax, and priclcing the same with pins and needels ; 
affirming also that the same neighbor of hirs had bestowed the 
same in some secret corner of the house. This being beleeved, the 
house was searched by credible persons, but nothing could be found. 
The witch or wise woman being certified hereof, continued hir 
assertion, and would needs go to the house where she hir selfe (as she 
affirmed) would certeinlie find it. When she came thither, she 
187. used hir cunning (as it chanced) to hir owne confusion, or at least/wise 
to hir detection ; for heerein she did, as some of the wiser sort mis- 
2^g. trusted that she woulde doo, laieng downe privilie such an/ image (as 
she had before described) in a corner, which by others had beene 
most diligentlie searched & looked into, & by that means hir cousen- 
age was notablie bewraied. And I would wish that all witchmongers 
might paie for their lewd repaire to inchantors, and consultation with 
witches, and such as have familiar spirits, as some of these did, and 
that by the order of the high commissioners, which partlie for respect 
of neighborhood, and partlie for other considerations, I leave un- 
spoken of. 
The xvii. Chapter. 
This clvirm 
seemeth to 
allude lo 
Christ cru- 
cified be- 
tweene the 
two theevs. 
Enajished by 
Abraham 
Fleming. 
P.-al. 44. 
Su7idrie sorts of charvies tending io diverse purposes, and first, 
certeine charmes to make taciizirniiie in tortures. 
MPARIBUS meritis tria 
pendent corpora raviis, 
D is mas GesiaS, 
in medio est divina potestas, 
Dismas damnatur, 
Gestas ad astra levatur : 
Three bodies on a bough doo hang, 
for merits of inequalitie, 
Dismas and Gestas, in the midst 
the power of the divinitie. 
Dismas is damned, but Gestas lif- 
ted up above the starres on hie. 
Also this : Eructavit cor meum verbum bomim veritaiem nunquam 
dicam regi. 4!r Otherwise : As the milke of our ladie was lussious to 
our Lord Jesus Christ ; so let this torture or rope be pleasant to mine

