subscribe to such things as were doone a few days before. The 
citizens taking good advise on the matter, least they should offend the 
Maior, or bring themselves in trouble, refused so to doo. But the 
moonks notwithstanding take from thence the sweete bread, which 
they called the host and bodie of our Lord, with all the relikes of 
saintes, and carrie them to another place, and there saie their masse. 
4^y. The bishops substi/tute judge (whome they called Officiall) under- 
standing that matter, commeth thither, accompanied with certeine 
honest men, to the intent he might knowe the whole circumstance 
more exactlie : and therefore he commandeth them to make conjura- 
tion in his presence ; and also he requireth certeine to be chosen to 
go up into the top of the vawt, and there to see whether any ghost 
appeered or not. Stephanus Aterbatensis stiffelie denied that to be 
lawfull, and marvellouslie persuading the contrarie, affirmed that the 
spirit in no wise ought to be troubled. And albeit the Official urged 
them verie much, that there might be some conjuring of the spirit ; 
yet could he nothing prevaile. 
Whilest these things were dooing,the Maior, when he had shewed the 
other Justices of the citie, what he would have them to doo, tooke his

--- PAGE 467 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. ?3. 
3^9 
journie to the king, and opened the whole matter unto him. And 
bicause the moonks refused judgement upon plea of their owne lawes 
and liberties, the king choosing out certeine of the aldermen of Paris, 
giveth them absolute and full authoritie to make inquirie of the 
matter. The like dooth the Chancelor maister Anthotiius Prafensis 
cardinall and legat for the pope throughout France. Therefore, when 
they had no exception to alledge, they were conveied unto Paris, and 
there constrained to make their answer. But yet could nothing be 
wroong out of them by confession, whereupon they were put apart 
into divers prisons : the novice being kept in the house of maister 
Fumanits, one of the aldennen, was oftentimes examined, and earn- 
estlie requested to utter the truth, but would notwithstanding confesse 
nothing ; bicause he feared that the moonks would afterwards put him 
to death for staining their order, and putting it to open shame. But 
when the judges had made him sure promise that he should escape 
punishment, and that he should never come into their handling, he 
opened unto them the whole matter as it was doone : and being 
brought before his fellowes, avouched the same to their faces. The 
moonks, albeit they were convicted, and by these meanes almost 
taken tarde* with the deed doing ; yet did they refuse the judges, 
bragging and vaunting themselves on their priviledges, but all in 
vaine. For sentence passed upon them, and they were condemned 
to be carried backe againe to Orlea7ice, and there to be cast in prison, 
and so should finalliebe/ brought foorth into the cheefe church of the 
citie openlie, and from thence to the place of execution, where they 
should make open confession of their trespasses. 
Surelie this was most common among moonks and friers, who 
mainteined their rehgion, their lust, their liberties, their pompe, their 
wealth, their estimation and knaverie by such cousening practises. 
Now I will shew you more speciall orders of popish conjurations, that 
are so shameleslie admitted into the church of Rome, that they are 
not onelie suffered, but commanded to be used, not by night secretlie, 
but by dale impudentlie. And these forsooth concerne the 
curing of bewitched persons, and such as are possessed ; to 
wit, such as have a divell put into them by witches 
inchantments. And herewithall I will set 
downe certeine rules delivered unto 
us by such popish doctors, 
as are of greatest 
reputation. 
An obsti- 
nate and 
wilfull per- 
sisting in 
the deni- 
eng or not 
confessing 
of a fault 
committed. 
[» = tarred] 
317. 
438. 
A parecua- 
sis or tran- 
sition of the 
author to 
matter far- 
ther purpo- 
sed. 
B

--- PAGE 468 ---
370 
The discovcrie 
The xxiiii. Chapter. 
Who may be conptrors in the Romish church besides priests, a 
ridiculous dcfinitioii of superstition, what words are to be used 
and not used iti exorcismes, rebaptisme allowed, it is lawfull to 
conjtire any thing, differences betweene holie water and cotiju- 
ration. 
In 4 dist. 
23. sent. 
439- 
Et glos supn- 
illo ad (oil. 2. 
Mendaces 
dehent esse 
memores, 
multb magis 
astuti exor- 
cistcr. 318, 
HOMAS AQUINAS saith, that anie bodie, though he be 
of an inferior or superior order, yea though of none order 
at all (and as Gulielmus Durandus glossator Raimundi 
affirmeth, a woman so she blesse not the girdle or the 
garment, but the person of the bewitched) hath power to exercise the 
order of an exorcist or conjuror, even as well as any preest may saie 
masse in a house unconsecrated. But that is (saith M. Mai.) rather 
through the goodnesse and licence of the pope, than through the 
grace of the sacrament. Naie, there are examples set downe, where 
some being bewitched were cured (as M. Mai. taketh it) without any 
conjuration at all. Marrie there were certeine Pater nosters, Aves, and 
Credos] said, and crosses made, but they are charmes, they saie, 
and no conjurations. For they saie that such charmes are lawfull, 
bicause there is no superstition in them, &c. 
And it is woorth my labour, to shew you how papists define 
superstition, and how they expound the definition thereof Supersti- 
tion (saie they) is a religion observed beyond measure, a religion 
practised with evill and unperfect circumstances. Also, whatsoever 
usurpeth the name of religion, through humane tradition, without the 
popes authoritie, is superstitious : as to adde or joine anie hymnes 
to the masse, to interrupt anie diriges, to to* abridge anie part of 
the creed in the singing thereof, or to sing when the organs go, 
and not when the quier singeth, not to have one tohelpe the priest to 
masse : and such like, &c. 
These popish exorcists doo manie times forget their owne rules. 
For they should not directlie in their conjurations call upon the divell 
(as they doo) with intreatie, but with authoritie and commandement. 
Nei/ther should they have in their charmes and conjurations anie un- 
knowne names. Neither should there be (as alwaies there is) anie 
falshood conteined in the matter of the charme of conjuration, 
as (saie they) old women have in theirs, when they saie ; The 
blessed virgine passed over Jordan, and then S. Steven met hir, 
and asked hir, &c. Neither should they have anie other vaine 
characters, but the crosse (for those are the words:) and manie other

--- PAGE 469 ---
of Witchcraft. char. 24- 3 7 1 
such cautions have they, which they observe not, for they have made 
it lawfull elsewhere. 
But Thomas their cheefe piller prooveth their conjuring and charmes Tho. Aquin. 
lawfull by S. Marke, who saith ; Signa eos qui n'ediderunt ; And, "atYm. 
In nomine vieo dcEvionia ejicient, Ss^c : whereby he also prooveth that '^a*. '7 
they maie conjure serpents. And there he taketh paines to proove, 
that the words of God are of as great holinesse as relikes of saints, 
whereas (in such respect as they meane) they are both alike, and in- 
deed nothing woorth. And I can tell them further, that so they maie 
be carried, as either of them maie doo a man much harme either in 
bodie or soule. 
But they proove this by S. Augustine, saieng ; Non est tnhius Atiimme 
verbum Dei, quam corpus Christi : whereupon they conclude thus ; 
By all mens opinions it is lawfull to carrie about reverentlie the relikes 
of saints; Ergo it is lawfull against evill spirits, to in/vocate the name 440. 
of God everie waie ; by the Pater noster, the Ave, the nativitie, the 
passion, the five wounds, the title triumphant, by the seven words 
spoken on the crosse, by the nailes, &c : and there maie be hope 
reposed in them. Yea, they saie it is lawfull to conjure all things, Mai. mau/. 
bicause the divell maie have power in all things. And first, alwaies " ' 
the person or thing, wherein the divell is, must be exorcised, and then 
the divell must be conjured. Also they affirme, that it is as expedient 
to consecrate and conjure porrage and meate, as water and salt, or 
such like things. 
The right order of exorcisme in rebaptisme of a person possessed Rites, cere- 
or bewitched, requireth that exsuffliation and abrenunciation be doone "ei'fkes'of"'^ 
toward the west. Item, there must be erection of hands, confession, exorcisme 
... . . . - 111- J rebapti- 
profession, oration, benediction, imposition of hands, denudation and sing of the 
unction, with holie oile after baptisme, communion, and induition of b°^ftched.°'^ 
the surplis. But they saie that this needeth not, where the bewitched 
is exorcised : but that the bewitched be first confessed, and then to 
hold a candle in his hand, and in steed of a surplise to tie about his 
bare bodie a holie candle of the length of Christ, or of the crosse 
whereupon he died, which for monie maie be had at Rome. Ergo 
(saith M. Mai.) this maie be said ; I conjure thee Peter or Barbara 
being sicke, but regenerate in the holie water of baptisme, by the living 
God, by the true God, by the holie God, by the God which redeemed 
thee with his pretious bloud, that thou maiest be made a conjured 
man, that everie fantasie and wickednesse of diabolicall deceipt doo 
avoid and depart from thee, and that everie uncleane spirit be conjured 
through him that shall come to judge the quicke and the dead, and 
the world by fier. Amen : Oremus, &c. And this conjuration, with 
Oremus, and a praier, must be thrise repeated, and at the end alwaies

--- PAGE 470 ---
2 7 2 15' Booke, The discoverie 
must be said ; Ergo tnaledicte diabole recognosce sententiam tuam, 
319. iS^iT. And this order must alwaies be/ followed. And finallie, there 
Memoran- must be diligent search made, in everie corner, and under everie 
dum that coverlet and pallet, and under everie threshhold of the doores, for 
this IS for r ; ' 
one bewit- instruments of witchcraft. And if anie be found, they must streight- 
waie be throwne into the fier. Also they must change all their bed- 
ding, their clothing, and their habitation. And if nothing be found, 
the partie that is to be exorcised or conjured, must come to the church 
441- rath in the morning : and the holier the dale is, the/ better, speciallie 
our Ladie daie. And the preest, if he be shriven himselfe and in 
perfect state, shall doo the better therein. And let him that is ex- 
orcised hold a holie candle in his hand, &c. Alwaies provided, that 
the holie water be throwne upon him, and a stoale put about his necke, 
with Deus hi adjutorinvi, and the Letanie, with invocation of saints. 
And this order male continue thrise a weeke, so as (sale they) through 
multiplication of intercessors, or rather intercessions, grace male be 
obteined, and favor procured. 
There is also some question in the Romish church, whether the 
sacrament of the altar is to be received before or after the exorcisme. 
Item in shrift, the confessor must learne whether the partie be not 
excommunicate, and so for want of absolution, endure this vexation. 
Thomas sheweth the difference betwixt holie water and conjuration, 
saieng that holie water driveth the divell awaie from the externall and 
outward parts ; but conjurations from the internall and inward 
parts ; and therefore unto the bewitched partie both are to be 
applied. 
Note the 
proviso. 
Tho. Aguin. 
supr. dist. 6. 
The XXV. Chapter. 
The seven reasons -why some are not rid of the divell with all 
their popish conjurations, why there were no conjurors in the 
primitive church, and why the divell is not so soone cast out of 
the bewitched as of the possessed. 
HE reason why some are not remedied for all their con- 
jurations, the papists say is for seven causes. First, for 
that the faith of the standers by is naught ; secondlie, for 
that theirs that present the partie is no better ; thirdlie, 
4 bicause of the sinnes of the bewitched ; fourthlie, for the neglecting 
5 of meete remedies ; fiftlie, for the reverence of vertues going out into 
^- 7 others ; sixtlie, for the purgation ; seventhlie, for the merit of the 
partie bewitched. And lo, the first foure are proved by Matthew the 
442. 7- and Marke the 4./ when one presented his sonne, and the multitude

--- PAGE 471 ---
seven rea- 
sons. 
of Witchcraft. chap. 26. 373 
wanted faith, & the father said, Lord help mine incredulitie or un- 
beleefe. Wherupon was said. Oh faithlesse and perverse generation, ^1°"^^^^ 
how long shall I be with you ? And where these words are written ; the former 
And Jesus rebuked him, &c. That is to saie, saie they, the possessed 
or bewitched for his sinnes. For by the neglect of due remedies it 
appeereth, that there were not with Christ good and perfect men : for 
the pillers of the faith ; to wit, Peter, James, and John were absent. 
Neither was there fasting and praier, without the which that kind of 
divels could not be cast out. For the fourth point ; to wit, the fault 
of the exorcist in faith maie ap/peare; for that afterwards the disciples 320. 
asked the cause of their impotencie therin. And Jesus answered, it 
was for their incredulitie ; saieng that if they had as much faith as a 
graine of mustard seed, they should move mountaines, &c. The fift 
is prooved by Vitas patrum, the lives of the fathers, where it appeereth 
that S. Anthonie could not doo that cure, when his scholar Paule 
could doo it, and did it. For the proofe of the sixt excuse it is said, 
that though the fault be taken awaie therby ; yet it foUoweth not 
that alwaies the punishment is released. Last of all it is said, 
that it is possible that the divell was not conjured out of the partie 
before baptisme by the exorcist, or the midwife hath not baptised him 
well, but omitted some part of the sacrament. If any object that Why there 
there were no exorcists in the primitive church, it is answered, that conjurors 
the church cannot now erre. And saint Gregorie would never have p"™'" 
" live church 
instituted it in vaine. And it is a generall rule, that who or whatso- with other 
ever is newlie exorcised, must be rebaptised : as also such as walke 
or talke in their sleepe ; for (saie they) call them by their names, and 
presentlie they wake, or fall if they clime : whereby it is gathered, 
that they are not trulie named in baptisme. Item they saie, it is 
somewhat more difficult to conjure the divell out of one bewitched, 
than out of one possessed : bicause in the bewitched, he is double ; 
in the other single. They have a hundred such beggerlie, foolish, and 
frivolous notes in this behalfe./ 
The xxvi. Chapter. 44^. 
other grosse absurdities oj witchmongers in this matter of 
conjurations. 
URELIE I cannot see what difference or distinction the 
witchmongers doo put betweene the knowledge and power 
of God and the divell ; but that they think, if they praie, 
or rather talke to God, till their hearts ake, he never 
heareth them ; but that the divell dooth knowe everie thought and

--- PAGE 472 ---
374 IS. Bookc. The discoverie 
imagination of their minds, and both can and also will doo any thing 
for them. For if anie that meaneth good faith with the divell read 
certeine conjurations, he commeth up (they saie) at a trice. Marrie 
if another that hath none intent to raise him, read or pronounce the 
A conjuror words, he will not stirre. And yet J. Bodin confesseth, that he is 
must not be afraid to read such conjurations, as John Wierus reciteth ; least 
timerous or (belike) the divell would come up, and scratch him with his fowle 
long nailes. In which sort I woonder that the divell dealeth with 
none other, than witches and conjurors. I for my part have read a 
number of their conjurations, but never could see anie divels of 
theirs, except it were in a plaie. But the divell (belike) knoweth my 
mind ; to wit, that I would be loth to come within the compasse of 
Where a j^jg clawes. But lo what reason such people have. Bodin, Bartholo- 
witch cu- ^ ^ ' 
reth by in- 7neus SpiHeus, SpreHgcT, and Institor, &c : doo constantlie afifirme, 
and'the""' that witches are to be punished with more extremitie than conjurors ; 
conjuror and sometimcs with death, when the other are to be pardoned doing 
by conju- ' i ■ i 
ration. the same offense : bicause (say they) the witches make a league with 
321. the divell, &/ so doo not conjurors. Now if conjurors make no league 
by their owne confession, and divels indeed know not our cogitations 
(as I have sufficientlie prooved) then would I weet of our witch- 
mongers the reason, (if I read the conjuration and performe the 
ceremonie) why the divell will not come at my call? But oh absurd 
credulitie ! Even in this point manie wise & learned men have 
444- beene & are abused :/ wheras, if they would make experience, or 
dulie expend the cause, they might be soone resolved; specially when 
the whole art and circumstance is so contrarie to Gods word, as it 
must be false, if the other be true. So as you may understand, that 
the papists do not onlie by their doctrine, in bookes & sermons teach 
& publish conjurations, & the order thereof, whereby they may induce 
men to bestowe, or rather cast awaie their monie upon masses 
and suffrages for their soules ; but they make it also a par- 
cell of their sacrament of orders (of the which number 
a conjuror is one) and insert manie formes of 
conjurations into their divine service, and 
not onelie into their pontificals, but 
into their masse bookes ; 
yea into the verie 
canon of the 
masse.

--- PAGE 473 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 27. 
375 
The xxvii. Chapter. 
Certaine conjurations taken out of the pontificall and out of 
the missalL 
|UT see yet a little more of popish conjurations, and con- 
ferre them with the other. In the *pontificall you shall 
find this conjuration, which the other conjurors use as 
solemnelie as they : I conjure thee thou creature of water 
in the name of the fa>I<ther, of the so>{<nne, and of the Holie»J*ghost, 
that thou drive awaie the divell from the bounds of the just, that he 
remaine not in the darke corners of this church and altar. You 
shall find in the same title, these words following, to be used at the 
hallowing of churches. There must a crosse of ashes be made upon 
the pavement, from one end of the church to the other, one handful! 
broad : and one of the priests must write on the one side thereof the 
Greeke alphabet, and on the otherside the Latin alphabet. Duratidus Durand. de 
yeeldeth this reason thereof; to wit. It representeth the union in faith dicatiom lib. 
of the Jewes and Gentiles. And yet well agreeing to himselfe he '•/<"'• i^- 
saith even there, that the crosse reaching from the one end to the 
other, signifieth that the people, which were in the head, shalbe made 
the taile./ 
* Til. de ec- 
clesite dedi- 
catione. 
Ibidem , fol. 
^ A co7ijuration written in the masse booke. Fol. i. 
445- 
I Conjure thee O creature of salt by God, by the God that liveth, in Missah. 
by the true *i* God, by the holie God, which by Elizaus the 
prophet commanded, that thou shouldest be throwne into the water. The maner 
that it thereby might be made whole and sound, that thou salt [here °ing°Mrt" 
let the preest looke upon the salt] maist be conjured for the health of 
all beleevers, and that thou/ be to all that take thee, health both of 322. 
bodie and soule ; and let all phantasies and wickednesse, or diaboli- 
call craft or deceipt, depart from the place whereon it is sprinkled ; 
as also everie uncleane spirit, being conjured by him that judgeth 
both the quicke and the dead by fier. Resp : Amen. Then followeth 
a praier to be said, without Dominus vobisa{m ; but yet with Orenius ; 
as followeth : 
^ Oremus. 
A Lmightie and everlasting God, we humblie desire thy clemency A praier to 
■tA. [here let the preest looke upon the salt] that thou wouldest to th?for'^ 
vouchsafe, through thy pietie, to bl'i'esse and sanc^fitifie this creature ^s'^ml.'""^'

--- PAGE 474 ---
37^ '5' Booke. The discoverie 
of salt, which thou hast given for the use of mankind, that it may be 
to all that receive it, health of mind and bodie ; so as whatsoever 
shall be touched thereby, or sprinkled therewith, may be void of all 
uncleannesse, and all resistance of spirituall iniquitie, through our 
Lord, Amen. 
What can be made but a conjuration of these words also, which 
are written in the canon, or rather in the saccaring of masse? This 
holie commixtion of the bodie and bloud of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
let it be made to me, and to all the receivers thereof, health of mind 
and bodie, and a wholesome preparative for the deserving and re- 
ceiving of everlasting life, through our Lord Jesus, Amen./ 
44b. 
The xxviii. Chapter. 
[*?sort. 
A conju- 
ration of 
frankin- 
cense set 
foorth in 
forme. 
[t read incense, 
Tobii, viii. 2, 3.] 
That popish priests leave nothing unconjured, a forme of 
exorcisme for incense. 
LTHOUGH the papists have mania conjurations, so as 
neither water, nor fier, nor bread, nor wine, nor wax, nor 
tallowe, nor church, nor churchyard, nor altar, nor altar 
cloath, nor ashes, nor coles, nor belles, nor bell ropes, 
nor copes, nor vestments, nor oile, nor salt, nor candle, nor candle- 
sticke, nor beds, nor bedstaves, &c ; are without their forme of 
conjuration : yet I will for brevitie let all passe, and end here with 
incense, which they doo conjure in this sort .* I conjure thee most 
filthy and horrible spirit, and everie vision of our enimie, &c : that 
thou go and depart from out of this creature of frankincense, with 
all thy deceipt and wickednes, that this creature may be sanctified, 
and in the name of our Lord ►{< Jesus ^ Christ ►{< that all they that 
taste, touch, or smell the same, may receive the virtue and assistance 
of the Holie-ghost ; so as wheresoever this incense or frankincense 
shall remaine, that there thou in no wise be so bold as to approch or 
once presume or attempt to hurt : but what uncleane spirit so ever 
thou be, that thou with all thy craft and subtiltie avoid and depart, 
being conjured by the name of God the father almightie, &c. And 
that wheresoever the fume or smoke thereof shall come, 
everie kind and sort of divels may be driven awaie, and 
expelled ; as they were at the increase! 
of the liver of fish, which the 
archangell Raphaell 
made, &c./

--- PAGE 475 ---
of Witchcraft. ciwp. 2^. 377 
The xxix. Chapter. 447- 323. 
The rules and lawes of popish Exorcists ajtd other conjurors all 
one, with a confutation of their whole power, how S. Marline 
conjured the divell 
HE papists you see, have their certeine generall rules and Papists and 
... . , ^ , conjurors 
lawes, as to absteine from sinne, and to fast, as also cousening 
otherwise to be cleane from all pollusions, &c : and even compeers, 
so likewise have the other conjurors. Some will sale 
that papists use divine service, and praiers ; even so doo common 
conjurors (as you see) even in the same papisticall forme, no whit 
swarving from theirs in faith and doctrine, nor yet in ungodlie and 
unreasonable kinds of petitions. Me thinks it may be a sufficient 
argument, to overthrow the calling up and miraculous works of spirits, 
that it is written ; God onelie knoweth and searcheth the harts, and i- Sam. 16, 7. 
onelie worketh great woonders. The which argument being prose- je^^^ 17, 10! 
cuted to the end, can never be answered : insomuch as that divine p^^J- ^g' 
power is required in that action. 
And if it be said, that in this conjuration we speake to the spirits, 
and they heare us, & therefore need not know our thoughts and 
imaginations : I first aske them whether king Baell, or Amoimon, 
which are spirits reigning in the furthest regions of the east (as they 
sale) may heare a conjurors voice, which calleth for them, being in 
the extreamest parts of the west, there being such noises interposed, 
where perhaps also they may be busie, and set to worke on the like 
affaires. Secondlie, whether those spirits be of the same power that 
God is, who is everiewhere, filling all places, and able to heare all 
men at one instant, &c. Thirdlie, whence commeth the force of such 
words as raise the dead, and command divels. If sound doo it, then 
may it be doone by a taber and a pipe, or any other instrument that 
hath no life. If the voice doo it, then may it be doone by any beasts 
or birds. If words, then a parret may doo it. If in mans words 
onlie, where is the/ force, in the first, second, or third syllable 1 If 448. 
in syllables, then not in words. If in imaginations, then the divell 
knoweth our thoughts. But all this stuffe is vaine and fabulous. 
It is written ; All the generations of the earth were healthfull, and Sap. 1. 14. 
there is no poison of destruction in them. Why then doo they con- Ce