ectris reporteth of a grave wise magistrate in the 
territorie of Tigjtrie, who affirmed, that as he and his servant went 
through certeine pastures, he espied in a morning, the divell in 
likenes of one whome he knew verie well, wickedlie dealing with a 
mare. Upon the sight whereof he immediatlie went to that fellowes 
house, and certeinlie learned there, that the same person went not out 
of his chamber that daie. And if he had not wiselie boolted out the 
matter, the good honest man (saith he) had surelie beene cast into 
prison, and put on the racke, &c. 
The like storie we read of one Ctmegnnda, wife to Henrie the second 
emperor of that name, in whose chamber the divell (in the likenes of 
a yoongman, with whome she was suspected to be too familiar in 
court) was often scene comming in and out. How belt, she was 
purged by the triall Candentis ferri, and prooved innocent : for she 
went upon glowing iron unhurt, &c. And yet Salomon saith ; Male 
a man carrie fier in his bosome, and his/ clothes not be burned.? Or 
can a man go upon coles, & his feete not scortched 1 And thus might 
the divell get him up into everie pulpit, and spred heresies, as I doubt 
not but he dooth in the mouth of wicked preachers, though not so 
grosselie as is imagined and reported by the papists and witchmongers. 
And because it shall not be said that I beelie them, I will cite a storie 
crediblie reported by their cheefest doctors ; namelie/^wzfj Sprenger, 
and Henrie Institor, who saie as folio weth, even word for word./

--- PAGE 503 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 6. 
He should 
rather have 
asked who 
gave him 
orders and 
licence to 
preach. 
The sixt Chapter. 347. 
How the div ell preached good doctrine in the shape of a preest, how 
he was discovered, and that it is a shajne ( after confutation of 
the greater witchcrafts ) for anie inafi to give credit to the lesser 
points the?-eof. 
|N a time the divell went up into a pulpit, and there made 
a verie cathoHke sermon : but a hohe preest comming to 
the good speed, by his holinesse perceived that it was the 
divell. So he gave good eare unto him, but could find no 
fault with his doctrine. And therefore so soone as the sermon was 
doone, he called the divell unto him, demanding the cause of his 
sincere preaching ; who answered : Behold I speake the truth, know- 
ing that while men be hearers of the word, and not followers, God is 
the more offended, and my kingdome the more inlarged. And this 
was the strangest devise (I thinke) that ever anie divell used : for the 
apostles themselves could have done no more. Againe, when with 
all their familiars, their ointments, &c : whereby they ride invisiblie, 
nor with all their charmes, they can neither conveie themselves from 
the hands of such as laie wait for them ; nor can get out of prison, 
that otherwise can go in and out at a mouse hole* ; nor finallie can [» pp. 9/, ^^^.] 
save themselves from the gallowes, that can transubstantiate their own 
and others bodies into flies or fleas, &c : who seeth not, that either 
they lie, or are beelied in their miracles 
When they are said to 
transfer their neighbors come into/ their owne ground, and yet are ^82. 
perpetuall beggers, and cannot inrich themselves, either with monie 
or otherwise : who is so foolish as to remaine longer in doubt of 
their supernaturall power.'' When never any yet from the beginning 
of the world till this dale, hath openlie shewed any other tricke, 
conceipt, or cunning point of witchcraft, than legierdemaine or 
cousenage : who will tarrie any longer for further triall ? When 
both the common law and also the injunctions doo condemne pro- 
phesieng, & likewise false miracles, and such as beleeve them in 
these dales : who will not be afraid to give credit to those knaveries ? 
When heereby they make the divell to be a god that heareth the 
praiers, and understandeth the minds of men : who will not be 
ashamed, being a christian, to be so abused by them 
When they 
that doo write most franklie of these matters, except lieng Sprenger Si 
Institor, have never seene any thing heerin ; insomuch as the most 
credible proofe that Bodin bringeth of his woonderfuU tales of witch- John. Bodin.

--- PAGE 504 ---
4o6 
i6. Bookc. 
The discoverie 
Yet manie 
that beare 
the shew of 
honest men 348. 
are verie 
credulous 
heerein. 
483- 
Witches 
are comon- 
lie verie 
beggers. 
craft, is the report of his host at an alehouse where he baited : who 
will give further eare unto these incredible fables ? When in all the 
new testament, we are not warned of these bodilie appearances of 
divels, as we are of his other subtilties, &c : who will be afraid of 
their bugs ? When no such bargaine is mentioned in the scriptures, 
why should we beleeve so incredible and impossible covenants, being 
the ground of all witchmongers religion, without the which they have 
no probabilitie in the rest of their foolish assertions ? When as, if 
any honest mans conscience be appealed unto, he must confesse he 
never saw triall of such witch/craft or conjuration to take effect, as is 
now so certeinlie affirmed : what conscience can condemne poore 
soules that are accused wrongfullie, or beleeve them that take upon 
them impiouslie to doo or worke those impossible things ? When the 
whole course of the scripture is utterlie repugnant to these impossible 
opinions, saving a few sentences, which neverthelesse rightlie under- 
stood, releeve them nothing at all : who will be seduced by their fond 
arguments ? When as now that men have spied the knaverie of 
oracles, & such pelfe, and that there is not one oracle in the world 
remaining : who cannot perceive that all the residue heeretofore of 
those devises, have beene cousenages, knaveries, and lies ? When 
the power of God is so impudentlie transferred to a base crea/ture, 
what good christian can abide to yeeld unto such miracles wrought 
by fooles ? When the old women accused of witchcraft, are utterlie 
insensible, and unable to saie for themselves ; and much lesse to 
bring such matters to passe, as they are accused of : who will not 
lament to see the extremitie used against them ? When the foolisher 
sort of people are alwaies most mistrustfuU of hurt by witchcraft, and 
the simplest and dotingest people mistrusted to doo the hurt : what 
wise man will not conceive all to be but follie ? When it were an 
easie matter for the divell, if he can doo as they affirme, to give them 
great store of monie, and make them rich, and dooth it not ; being a 
thing which would procure him more disciples than any other thing 
in the world : the wise must needs condemne the divell of follie, 
and the witches of peevishnesse, that take such paines, and 
give their soules to the divell to be tormented 
in hell fier, and their bodies to the 
hangman to be trussed on 
the gallowes, for 
nichels in 
a bag.

--- PAGE 505 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 7. 
The seventh Chapter, 
A conclusion against witchcraft, in maner and forjne of 
an Indttction. 
Y this time all kentishmen know (a few fooles excepted) A. R^j"^';^'^' 
that Robin goodfellowe is a knave. All wisemen under- against 
stand that witches miraculous enterprises, being contrarie [{JeTubject 
to nature, probabilitie and reason, are void of truth or of this book 
. ,, . , ... . concerneth 
All protestants perceive, that popish charmes, conjura- 
possibilitie. 
tions, execrations, and benedictions are not effectuall, but be toies 
and devises onelie to keepe the people blind, and to inrich the cleargie. 
All christians see, that to confesse witches can doo as they saie, were 
to attribute to a creature the power of the Creator. All children 
well brought up conceive and spie, or at the least are taught, that 
juglers miracles doo consist of legierdemaine and confederacie. The 
verie heathen people are driven to confesse, that there can be no 
such conference betweene a spirituall divell and a corporall witch, 
as is supposed. For no doubt, all the heathen would/ then have 
everie one his familiar divell ; for they would make no conscience 
to acquaint themselves with a divell that are not acquainted with 
God. 
I have dealt, and conferred with manie (marrie I must confesse 
papists/ for the most part) that mainteine every point of these 
absurdities. And surelie I allow better of their judgements, than of 
others, unto whome some part of these cousenages are discovered 
and seene : and yet concerning the residue, they remaine as wise as 
they were before ; speciallie being satisfied in the highest and greatest 
parts of conjuring and cousening ; to \yit, in poperie, and yet will be 
abused with beggerlie jugling, and witchcraft. 
349. 
The eight Chapter. 
Of naturall witchcraft or fascination. 
UT bicause I am loth to oppose my selfe against all the 
writers heerin, or altogither to discredit their stories, or 
wholie to deface their reports, touching the effects of 
fascination or witchcraft ; I will now set downe certeine 
parts thereof, which although I my selfe cannot admit, without some

--- PAGE 506 ---
4o8 
i6. Bookc. 
The discoverie 
Isigonus. 
Memphra- 
dorus. 
Solon, ^c. 
Vairus. 
J. Bodhtus. 
Mai. malef. 
doubts, difficulties and exceptions, yet will I give free libertie to others 
to beleeve them, if they list ; for that they doo not directlie oppugne 
my purpose. 
Manie great and grave authors write, and manie fond writers also 
affirme, that there are certeine families in Aphrica which with their 
voices bewitch whatsoever they praise. Insomuch as, if they com- 
mend either plant, corne, infant, horsse, or anie other beasts, the same 
presentlie withereth, decaieth and dieth. This mysterie of witchcraft 
is not unknowne or neglected of our vvitchmongers, and superstitious 
fooles heere in Enropa. But to shew you examples neere home heere in 
England, as though our voice had the like operation : you shall not 
heare a butcher or horssecourser cheapen a bullocke or a jade, but if 
4^5- he/ buie him not, he saith, God save him ; if he doo forget it, and the 
horsse or bullocke chance to die, the fault is imputed to the chapman. 
Certeinelie the sentence is godlie, if it doo proceed from a faithfull and 
a godlie mind : but if it be spoken as a superstitious charme, by 
those words and syllables to compound with the fascination and mis- 
adventure of infortunate words, the phrase is wicked and super- 
stitious, though there were farre greater shew of godlinesse than 
appeereth therein. 
The ninth Chapter. 
With ths 
like pro- 
pertie were 
the old II- 
lyrian peo- 
ple indued : 
if we will 
credit the 
words of 
Sabinus 
grounded 
upon the 
report of 
Aul. Cell. 
J. Bap. Nta- 
pol. in lib. de 
naturali 
niagia. 
350. 
Of inchanting or bewitchitig eies. 
ANIE writers agree with Virgil and Theocritus in the 
effect of witching eies, affirming that in Scythia, there are 
women called Bithice, having two balles or rather blacks 
in the apple of their eies. And as Didymus reporteth, 
some have in the one eie two such balles, and in the other the image 
of a horsse. These (forsooth) with their angrie lookes doo bewitch 
and hurt not onelie yoong lambs, but yoong children. There be other 
that/ reteine such venome in their eies, and send it foorth by beames 
and streames so violentlie, that therewith they annoie not onlie them 
with whom they are conversant continuallie ; but also all other, 
whose companie they frequent, of what age, strength, or complexion 
soever they be : as Cicero, Plutarch, Philarchus, and manie others 
give out in their writings. 
This fascination (saith John Baptista Porta Neapolitanus) though 
it begin by touching or breathing, is alwaies accomplished and 
finished by the eie, as an extermination or expulsion of the spirits

--- PAGE 507 ---
of some for 
truth. 
of Witchcraft. ch.-ip. 9. 409 
through the eies, approching to the hart of the bewitched, and j.Bajt.Nea- 
infecting the same, &c. Wherby it commeth to passe, that a child, ^/"ati'mif' '^^ 
or a yoong man endued with a cleare, whole, subtill and sweet bloud, ""^fi'"- 
yeeldeth the like spirits, breath, and vapors springing from the purer 
bloud of the hart. And the lightest and finest/ spirits, ascending into 486. 
the highest parts of the head, doo fall into the eies, and so are from 
thence sent foorth, as being of all other parts of the bodie the most 
cleare, and fullest of veines and pores, and with the verie spirit or 
vapor proceeding thence, is conveied out as it were by beames and 
streames a certeine fierie force ; whereof he that beholdeth sore eies This is held 
shall have good experience. For the poison and disease in the eie in- 
fecteth the aire next unto it, and the same proceedeth further, carrieng 
with it the vapor and infection of the corrupted bloud : with the con- 
tagion whereof, the eies of the beholders are most apt to be infected. 
By this same meanes it is thought that the cockatrice depriveth the 
life, and a woolfe taketh awaie the voice of such as they suddenlie 
meete withall and behold. 
Old women, in whome the ordinarie course of nature faileth in the 
office of purging their naturall monethlie humors, shew also some 
proofe hereof. For (as the said J. B.P.N, reporteth, alledging Aris- 
totle for his author) they leave in a looking glasse a certeine froth, 
by meanes of the grosse vapors proceeding out of their eies. Which 
commeth so to passe, bicause those vapors or spirits, which so 
abundantlie come from their eies, cannot pearse and enter into the 
glasse, which is hard, and without pores, and therefore resisteth : but nou est in 
the beames which are carried in the chariot or conveiance of the ^^"J^spJcu- 
spirits, from the eies of one bodie to another, doo pearse to the in- laturineo. 
ward parts, and there breed infection, whilest they search and seeke 
for their proper region. And as these beames & vapors doo proceed 
from the hart of the one, so are they turned into bloud about the 
hart of the other : which bloud disagreeing with the nature of the 
bewitched partie, infeebleth the rest of his bodie, and 
maketh him sicke : the contagion wherof so long con- 
tinueth, as the distempered bloud hath force in the 
members. And bicause the infection is of bloud, 
the fever or sicknes will be continuall ; 
whereas if it were of choler, or 
flegme, it would be 
intermittent or 
alterable.//

--- PAGE 508 ---
410 
1 6 Booke. 
The discoverie, &c. 
4S7. 351. 
The tenth Chapter. 
Nescio quis ocu- 
lus teneros mi- 
hi fascinat ag- 
nos, saith Virgil: 
and ihus Engli- 
shed by Abni- 
ham Fleming: 
I wote not I 
What zvitching eie 
Doth use to hunt 
My tender lams 
Sucking their dams 
And them inchant. 
Englished by 
Abraham 
Fleming, 
488. 
Of tiaturall witchcraft for love, d^c. 
UT as there is fascination and witchcraft by malicious and 
angrie eies unto displeasure : so are there witching as- 
pects, tending contrariwise to love, or at the least, to the 
 ^ procuring of good will and liking. For if the fascination 
or witchcraft be brought to passe or provoked by the desire, by the 
wishing and coveting of anie beautifuU shape or favor, the venome is 
strained through the eies, though it be from afar, and the imagination 
of a beautifull forme resteth in the hart of the lover, and kmdleth 
the fier wherewith it is afflicted. And bicause the most delicate, 
sweete, and tender bloud of the belooved doth there wander, his 
countenance is there represented shining in his owne bloud, and 
cannot there be quiet ; and is so haled from thence, that the bloud 
of him that is wounded, reboundeth and slippeth into the wounder, 
according to the saieng of Lucretius the poet to the like purpose and 
meaning in these verses : 
Idque petit corpus, mens unde est saucia ainore, 
Ndmque otmies pleninque cadunt in vulnus, 6-^ illam 
Emicat in partem sanguis, unde icimur ictu ; 
Et si coininus est, as turn ruber occupat humor : 
And to that bodie tis rebounded, 
Frofn whence the 7nind by love is wounded. 
For in a maner all and some. 
Into that wound of love doo co7Jie,\ 
And to that part the bloud doth flee 
From whence with stroke we striken bee, . 
If hard at hand, and neere in place. 
Then ruddie colour files the face. 
Thus much may seeme sufficient touching this matter of naturall 
magicke ; whereunto though much more may be annexed, yet for the 
avoiding of tediousnes, and for speedier passage to that which 
remaineth ; I will breake off this present treatise. 
And now somewhat shall be said con- 
cerning divels and spirits 
in the discourse 
following.//

--- PAGE 509 ---
A Discoitrse iLpon divels and spirits, 4S9. sshsi. 
and first of philosophers opinions^ also the 
maner of their reasoning hereupon j* ["This line Itai.] 
a}id the same confuted. 
The first Chapter. 
HERE is no question nor theme (saith Hierome Cardane) H. Card. lib. 
so difficult to deale in, nor so noble an argument to dis- f6.'^'^.'^3.' 
pute upon, as this of divels and spirits. For that being 
confessed or doubted of, the eternitie of the soule is 
either affirmed or denied. The heathen philosophers reson hereof 
amongest themselves in this sort. First, they that mainteine the The Piato- 
perpetuitie of the soule, sale that if the soule died with the bodie ; sloiks. 
to what end should men take paines either to live well or die well, 
when no reward for vertue nor punishment for vice insueth after 
this life, the which otherwise they might spend in ease and securitie.? 
The other sort sale that vertue and honestie is to be pursued, Non The Epicu- 
f. reans and 
spe prcemit, sed virtutis afnore, that is. Not for hope of reward, but Peripate- 
for love of vertue. If the soule live ever (sale the other) the least 
portion of life is here. And therefore we that mainteine the perpe- 
tuitie of the soule, may be of the better comfort and courage, to 
susteine with more constancie the losse of children, yea and the 
losse of life it selfe : whereas, if the/ soule were mortall, all our hope 490. 
and felicitie were to be placed in this life, which manie Atheists (I 
warrant you) at this dale doo. But both the one and the other 
missed the cushion. For, to doo anie thing without Christ, is to 
wearie our selves in vaine ; sith in him onelie our corruptions are 
purged. And therefore the foUie of the Gentils, that place Summuni Sunivzuni 
bonum in the felicitie of the bodie, or in the happines or pleasures of no" cons^t" 
the mind, is not onelie to be derided, but also abhorred. For, both '"^'gj.'^g^f^j^g 
our bodies and minds are intermedled with most miserable calamities: bodie or 
and therefore therin cannot consist perfect felicitie. But in the word 
of God is exhibited and offered unto us that hope which is most 
certeine, absolute, sound & sincere, not to be answered or denied by 
the judgement of philosophers themselves. For they that preferre ^"ance!"

--- PAGE 510 ---
412 
Chap. 2. 
A discowse of 
temperance before all other things as Sunviinm bonum, must needs 
see it to be but a witnesse of their naturall calamitie, corruption and 
wickednes ; and that it serveth for nothing, but to restraine the 
dissolutenes, which hath place in their minds infected with vices ; 
which are to be bridled with such corrections : yea and the best of 
them all faileth in some point of modestie. Wherefore serveth our 
Moraii philosophers prudence, but to provide for their owne follie and 
prudence. miserie ; whereby they might else be utterlie overthrowne? And if 
their nature were not intangled in errors, they should have no need/ 
Morall 353. of such circumspectioH. The justice whereof they speake, serveth 
but to keepe them from ravine, theft, and violence : and yet none of 
them all are so just, but that the verie best and uprightest of them 
fall into great infirmities, both dooing and suffering much wrong and 
Morall injurie. And what is their fortitude, but to arme them to endure 
""^ ' " miserie, greefe, danger, and death it selfe But what happinesse or 
goodnesse is to be reposed in that life, which must be waited upon 
with such calamities, and finallie must have the helpe of death to 
finish it ? I sale, if it be so miserable, why doo they place SiDiumnn 
Rom. 2. bomim therein .'' S. Paule to the Romans sheweth, that it cannot be 
that we should atteine to justice, through the morall and naturall 
actions and duties of this life : bicause that never the Jewes nor the 
Gentiles could expresse so much in their lives, as the verie lawe of 
nature or of Moses required. And therefore he that worketh without 
Christ, doth as he that reckoneth without his host./ 
491. 
The second Chapter. 
The que- 
stion about 
sjiirits 
doublfull 
and diffi- 
cult. 
Mine owne opmion concerning this argicmcnt, io the disproof e of 
some writers heretcpon. 
FOR my part doo also thinke this argument, about the 
nature & substance of divels and spirits, to be so difficult, 
as I am persuaded that no one author hath in anie certeine 
or perfect sort hitherto written thereof. In which respect 
I can neitherallow the ungodly and prophane sects and doctrines of the 
Saddnces & Peripatetiks, who denie that there are any divels or 
spirits at all ; nor the fond & superstitious treatises of Plato, Proclus, 
Plotimis, Porphyrie ; nor yet the vaine & absurd opinions of Psellus, 
Nider, Sprenger, Cumanus, Bodin, Michael., Andrceas, fanus Mat- 
thcEus, Laiircntiits Ananias, fainblichiis, &^c : who with manie others 
write so ridiculouslie in these matters, as if they were babes fraied

--- PAGE 511 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 
with bugges ; some affirming that the soules of the dead become 
spirits, the good to be angels, the bad to be divels ; some that 
spirits or divels are onelie in this life ; some, that they are men ; 
some, that they are women ; some, that divels are of such gender 
as they list themselves ; some, that they had no beginning, nor 
shall have ending, as the Manicheis mainteine ; some, that they 
are mortall & die, as Plutarch affirmeth of Pan ; some, that they 
have no bodies at all, but receive bodies, according to their phan- 
tasies & imaginations ; some, that their bodies are given unto them ; 
some, that they make themselves. Some saie they are wind ; some, 
that they are the breath of living creatures ; some, that one of them 
begat another ; some, that they were created of the least part of 
the masse, whereof the earth was made ; and some, that they are 
substances betweene God and man, and that of them some are terres- 
tiiall, some celestiall, some waterie, some airie, some fierie, some 
starrie, and some of each and everie part of the elements, and that 
they know our thoughts, and carrie our good works and praiers to 
God, and returne his benefits backe unto us,/ and that they are to be 
worshipped : wherein they meete and agree jumpe with the papists ; 
as if you read the notes upon the second chapter to the Colossians,\ in 
the Seminaries testament printed at Ti/^^w^'j, you shall manifestlie see, 
though as contrarie to the word of God as blacke to white, as appear- 
eth in the Apocalypse^ where the angell expresselie forbad JoJm to 
worship him. 
Againe, some saie that they are meane betwixt terrestriall and 
celestiall bodies, communicating part of each nature ; and that 
although they be eternal!, yet that they are mooved with affections : 
and as there are birds in the aire, fishes in the water, and wormes in 
the earth ; so in the fourth element, which is the fier, is the habitation 
of spirits and divels. And least we should thinke them idle, they saie 
they have charge over men, and governement in all countries and 
nations. Some saie that they are onelie imaginations in the 
mind of man. Tertullian saith they are birds, and flie faster 
than anie fowle of the aire. Some saie that divels 
are not, but when they are sent ; and therefore are 
called evill angels. Some thinke that the 
divell sendeth his angels abrode, and 
he himselfe maketh his con- 
tinuall abode in hell, 
his mansion 
place. 
Plotinus. 
The Greka. 
Laur. Ana- 
nias. 
The Mani- 
cheis. 
Plutarch, 
Psellus. 
Mai. male/. 
Avicen. and 
the Cabal- 
lists. 
The Thal- 
mudists. 
Psellus, <&^<-. 
The Plato- 
nists. 
The Pa- 
pists. 
354. 
49- 
Apoc. 19. 10 
Ibid. 22. 8. 9. 
The Sad- 
duces.

