d of Codriis Laanus, to 
whom an empty, meager Ghost appeared at midnight, signifying unto 
him, how sad and lachrymable a Tragedy was shortly to attend him ; 
and also adding, that he wotdd visit him in the Execution thereof : 
which proved not contrary to the words of the apparition ; for at the 
very instant, when his Treacherous Wife had stab'd him at the heart, 
on a suddain he beheld the same, with preparations for his interment, 
whilst he yet survived, after the fatall wound was given.

--- PAGE 600 ---
502 
Book II. 
A Discourse concerning 
The reason 
thereof. 
The power of 
Magitians over 
them. 
46. 
Example. 
The cause of 
the difficulty 
and paucity of 
appearances. 
5. Sometimes the starry spirit of a person appears to his beloved 
Companion, many hundred of miles asunder, who was ignorant of 
the death of the party : And it hath often been heard, that when none 
of the kindred or family of the said party deceased, have ever been 
disturbed by it, or in the least been sensible of its appearing ; yet to 
some of its most intimate acquaintance, it discovers it self, and 
importunes them to perform some ceremony, or other, that it may be 
returned into rest ; or else discovers some treasure, which was hid by 
the party whilest alive, or else some murther which it had commited : 
But the most frequent cause of their returning, is when the party hath 
himself been privately murthered. 
6. For such is the poysonous malice, and bloudy spirit of the 
murtherers, that it sufficeth them not to have privately bereaved them 
of their Lives ; but also by certain earnest Wishes, Curses, and Con- 
jurations, they do afterwards adjure them, that for such a term of 
years, they shall never have power to appear again : Which wishes, 
being earnestly given forth, from the hellish root in the murtherer, do 
exceedingly torment the murthered parties spirit, taking deep im- 
pression thereon ; so that it is alwayes in continual sorrow, and 
anguish, till the term of years be expired, and till the murther be 
made manifest to the world : after which discovery, it returns to 
perfect rest ; This is well known to those that are exercised in 
Witchcraft, and cruell Murthers, though not common to those that 
murther but once./ 
7. There be many Ancient families, in Europe, to whom the Ghost 
of their first Progenitor, or Ancestor appears immediately before the 
departure of some Heir, or chief in the same family : which assertion 
is confirmed by Cardatt, in an Example of "an Antient family, in the 
" Dukedome of Parma, called the Tortells, to whom there belongs an 
" ancient Castle, with a spatious Hall ; near the Chimney of the said 
" Hall an old decrepit Woman, for these hundreds of years, is wonted 
" to appear, when any of the Family is about to dye : And it is 
" reported amongst them that the same is the Ghost of one belonging 
" to the same name, and family, who for her Riches, was murthered by 
"some of her Nephews, and thrown into a pit. 
8. Many such apparitions do for many years continue to be seen in 
one particular place ; ever watching for opportunity, to discover some 
murther, or Treasure hid : And the cause of the difficulty of the said 
discovery, consists in the nature of their substance ; for could they 
make use of the organ of the Tongue, they might quickly discover 
it : or if they had the outward benefit of Hands, they might pro- 
duce the said Treasure, or Carcase murthered, but this they are 
seldome able to accomplish ; being destitute of the outward Organs,

--- PAGE 601 ---
Devils and Sph'its. 
Chap. III. 503 
More parlicii- 
larly of the 
same. 
and mediation of Hands to hold withall, or Tongue to vent their 
grievances : And that this is true, the manner of their appearance 
doth confirm it : For all that they are able to effect, if they have 
been murthered, is commonly to appear near the very place, where 
their body lies, and to seem as if they sunk down, or vanished in the 
same ; or else to appear in the posture of a murthered person, with 
mangled, and bloody wounds, and hair disshevel'd : But it is rarely 
known, that any such apparitions have plainly spoken, or uttered by 
words, the time of their murther, with the cause, the persons name, 
or place ; unless the murther, by circumstances hath been more then 
ordinary, horrid, and execrable : then the remembrance of the same 
doth sometimes enable the apparition to frame a voice, by the 
assistance of the Air, and discover the fact. 
9. But to speake in general concerning apparitions, why they are so 
seldome seen ; and why such spirits as appear, can not without mans 
assistance accomplish their design ; It may easily be apprehended, 
that all Spirits, or spiritual Substances, and DeviUs, have their life, 
breath, and motion in another source, or Element then this external 
world ; And as any creature, whom the Element of Water hath 
nourished, and bred, can live but short while upon the Land ; So its 
with them, when they come out of their proper habitations : which is 
the cause of the rarity of apparition ; it being as difficult for any 
spirit to manifest it self in this outward principle, of the four 
Elements, as for a man to continue with his head under water : yea 
it is rather pain, then pleasure for any spirit, whether good, or bad, to 
come into this outward world. 
10. Great is the villany of Necromancers, and wicked Magicians, The nefarious 
... -11 ■ • r 1 -1 n 1 • practices of 
m dealmg with the spirits of men departed ; whom they invocate, Necromancers 
with certain forms, and conjurations, digging up their Carkasses ^''^'"p'*^- 
again, or by the help of Sacrifices, and Oblations to the infernal Gods; 
compelling the Ghost to present it self before them : how this was 
performed in antient times, by Hags, and Witches, is notably 
described in the ALthiopian History of Heliodorus, in the practice 
" of an antient woman, who coming into the Camp, in the dead of 
"night; where amongst many slaughtered bodies, the body of her 
" Son was also slain ; whose carkase she laid before her, digging a 
" hole, and making a fire on each side, with the body in the midst ; 
" Then taking an earthen pot from a three footed stool, she poured 
" honey out of it, into the pit ; then out of another pot, she poured 
" milk ; and likewise out of the third : Lastly, she cast a Lump of 
"hardned dough, in the form of a man into the pit : the Image was 
" Crowned with Lawrell : then she threw in some of the Shrub called 
" Bdelliu/ii : This done, with a sword she ran frantickly up and down.

--- PAGE 602 ---
504 
Book II. 
A Discourse concerninz 
47. 
Example. 
The stale of the 
Starry Spirit. 
Why the Ghost 
of Samuel ap- 
peared. 
The opinions 
of Plato. 
"cutting herself; and with a Lawrell branch sprinkled of her blood 
" into the fire : at length whispering at her Sons ear, she caused him 
" to arise, and questioning him of the fortune of his Brother, what was 
" become of him, he answered dubiously speaking prospe/rity to two 
" persons that secretly beheld her, and telling her, That suddain death 
" for her impiety attended her, which came to passe ere she left the 
"place ; after all these predictions, the Carcase ceased to answer any 
" more : and tumbled groveling on the ground again. 
11. And although by most men, as also by the Author in his fore- 
going Discovery, it is constantly believed, that the Witch of Endor 
raised not Samuel, nor the Ghost of Samuel, as not beleeving that 
there is an Astral Spirit or Ghost belonging unto every Man ; yet it 
is very probable, that by her conjurations she caused his Sydereal 
Spirit to appear : which is possible to be effected : and hath been 
often done : as Weaver in his Funeral Monuments records of 
Edward Kelly, " who in the Park of Walton Ledale in the County 
Lancaster, with one Pajil Waring, Invocated a Devil, and after- 
" wards digg'd up the Corps of a poor man, that had been buried that 
" very day, in a place near the same, called Law Chicrch-yard : whom 
"he compelled by Incantations, and Conjurations to speak, and 
" utter prophetical words, concerning the master of one of his 
" Assistants. 
12. According to the state and condition wherein a person dyes, 
so is it with x!iv€\x Astral Spirit: for if they died in perfect peace, and 
had come through the valley of true Repentance ; being dead to this 
Life before it left them ; then their starry Spirit doth enter into 
rest, in its proper source, or quality at the instant of their Decease : 
nor is it possible for all the Conjurations in Hell, to cause them to 
return, or appear again. 
13. But some might object. That Samuel was an Holy Prophet, 
and attaind tmto a perfect Life ; which is thus to be answered, that 
before Christ came into the world, none of the most Holy Prophets 
of God, did ever attain to that degree of blessednesse, that the Chris- 
tians after Christ possessed: for in the time of the Law, a coverings or 
vail was spread over the faces of all people : and something there 
was that letted, or hindred their souls from any plain and perfect 
vision, and fruition of God ; otherwise then through types, and 
shaddows, which partition wall, the end of Christs Incarnation was to 
break down. 
14. In the writings of Plato, there be many strange Relations of 
the apparitions of Souls, of their torments, and purgations, of the 
cause of their returning, what their nature is, what their substance 
and property is, and what their food, and nourishment is : but he

--- PAGE 603 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. m. 
505 
mistakes the Soul for the Astral Spirit : for the Soul in its returning 
and apparition is farr different ; if a Holy Soul appear, it is to 
persons like it self, and that in sleep, warning them of dangers, and 
discovering heavenly secrets unto them : And if a Damned Soul 
appear, it is likewise to such as are of a nature like it self : whom 
it instigates, asleep, teaching them notorious Villanies in Dreams ; 
and provoking them to every wicked cogitation. 
15. The sect of Pythagoras have strange and antick opinions, con- oi Pythagoras. 
cerning Souls, and Ghosts, or starry Spirits : whom they alledge 
to be frequently converted into Gods, or DcEinons, or Demi-Gods, and 
Heroes : (as the Platonicks do,) And that there is a continual tra- 
duction, and transmigration of Souls, from one to another, till they 
attain to be deify'd at last ; and then that they do frequently appear, 
to those that be like themselves ; instructing, and forewarning 
them : It was also the belief of many wise, and antient Philosophers, 
that the Oracles were from such Damons, as had been the Ghosts, or 
Souls of wise and excellent men : as Apollo's Oracle, and the 
Oracle of Pallas, or Minerva : which opinions have much of reason 
and probability. 
16. It is also the opinion of some, that the particular Spirits of Of o-.her Phi- 
famous men do after the death of the body, take up some particular '°^°p'^'''^^- 
habitations, near such places Cities, Towns, or Countries, as they 
most do affect, as Tutelaries, and Guardians unto them ; Which is 
reported by Vopiscus, of Apollo7iiiis Thyaneiis ; That when his City 
Thya?ia was taken by Aureliamis the Emperour : and when he was 
in his Tent, pondering furiously how to destroy the same ; the 
Ghost of Apollofiius appeared unto him saying, Aurelianus, if thou 
desirest to be a Conquerotir, suppose not to slay these my Citizens : 
Aurelianus, if thou wilt be a Ruler, shed >io innocent blood : Aurelianus, 
be meek, and gentle, if thou u/ouldst be a Congjierour.j 
17. I have heard many wonderful Relations from Lunaticks or such 43. 
as are almost natural fools, ^vho have asserted. That being for inany The Raptures 
dales together conversant amongst Faeries iti Woods, Moimtains, and °' Luoaticks. 
Caverns of the Earth, they have feasted 'with them, and been magni- 
ficently Entertaind luith variety of dainties, where they have seen 
several of their Neighbours or Familiar acqicaintance in the habit they 
were wont to weare, notwithstanding they were known to have beefi 
dead some years before. 
18. And many Learned Authors have also insisted upon this par- Their Enter- 
ticular, alledging. That when such as the Faeryes have brought i7ito 
their Society do feast and jimket with them, though they have a real 
and perfect knowledge of their neighbours and acquaintance amongst 
the rest, yet their Language they are not able to understand, neither

--- PAGE 604 ---
5o6 
Book II. 
A Discourse conceriiincr 
o 
A strange ex- 
umple. 
Apparilions be- 
fore Christia- 
nity, were fre- 
quent. 
do these Acquaintance of theirs acknoiuledi^e or take notice of them at 
all, but do either sit {both they and all the rest) in a profoiuid a?id 
tedious silence, or else discourse in a most stupendious kinde of Gibber- 
ish, not intelligible to strangers. 
19. But more particularly to illustrate this conjecture, I could name 
the person who hath lately appeared thrice since his Decease, at 
least some CThostly being or other, that calls it self by the name 
of such a person who was dead above an hundred years agoe, and 
ia his hfe time accounted as a Prophet or Praedicter by the 
assistance of Sublunar)' Spirits. And now at his appearance did also 
give out strange Praedictions concerning Famine, and Plenty, Wans, 
and Bloodshed, and the end of this world. 
20. By the affirmation of the person that had Communication 
with him, the last of his Appearances was on this following manner ; 
/ had been, said he, to sell a Horse at the next Market Toivti, but not 
attaining tny price, as I returned home by the -way I met this man afore- 
said who began to be familiar 'with me, asking what ttews, and how 
affairs t>toved throughout the Country ; I answered as I thought fit ; 
withall I told him of my Horse whom he began to cheapen, and pro- 
ceeded with me so far, that the price was agreed upon ; so he turned 
back with me and told me, that if I would go alojtgwith him, I should 
receive my Money ; on our way we went, I upon my Horse and he on 
another milk white beast ; after much discourse I askt him where he 
dwelt, and what his name was ; he told me, That his dwelling was 
about a mile off, at a place called Farrati ; of which place I had never 
heard though I knew all the Country round about ; he also told 
me, That he himself was that person of the Family of Learmonts so 
much spoken off for a Prophet; At which I began to be somewhat 
fearful, perceiving us in a road which I had never been in before, 
which increased my fear and admiration more. Well on we went till 
he brought me under ground I know not how into the presence of a 
beautiful woman that payd me the moneys without a word speaking ; 
he conducted me out again through a large and long entry, where I 
saw above 600 men in Armour layd prostrate on the ground as if 
asleep : at last I found my self in the open field by the help of 
Moon-light in that very place where first I met him, and made shift 
to get home by three in the morning, but the money I received was 
just double of what I esteemed it, and what the woman payd me, of 
which at this instant I have several pieces to show consisting of nine 
pences, thirteen pence halfpennies, &^c. 
21. The variety of Examples throughout the writings of Learned 
men may sen e as stronge inducements to confirm this particular of 
Astral Spirits, or Ghosts that belong unto Mortal men, returning

--- PAGE 605 ---
Devils and Spiriis. chap. m. 507 
after death untill the cause of their returning be taken 
away. In Ancient times before the name of Christianity, there 
was nothing more frequent than millions of Apparitions in fields 
where battails had been fought, seeming to fight as they had 
done at first, which the Ancient Heathens believed to proceed from 
the want of Burying. And from this arose the Poetical Romance of 
the wandring of Ghosts besides the River Styx for an hundred years. 
And the custome of Solemn Interment amongst them. 
22. But with more probability, The Custome of the Funeral Piles why Funeral 
Pii6s were in- 
used by the Romans, and the Urns to reduce their Corpses into Ashes, siituied. 
was instituted at first to prevent the torment of the Deceased, least 
his Ghost should wander, or return, which doubtlesse from a natural 
cause may have the same effect, that the/ reducing of the carcase into 49^ 
Ashes suddainly after its decease may prevent the return of the 
Astral Spirit ; for if it be true what is affirmed by Paracelsus, that 
the starry Spirit can contintie no longer then the radical moisture in 
the body ; it will naturally follow that its appearance is at an end 
when the body is burnt, seeing that the moisture is totally extermi- 
nate and consumed thereby. And in some sense the Ceremony may 
be said to be Laudable and Judicious, having so beneficial a conse- 
quence. 
23. As there is some semblance of a natural cause in the custome wiwt the warn 
of the Antient urns, so likewise may the Interment of slaughtered seih.""^ "^^^ 
bodies by the like cause prevent the like Appearances ; for many 
are the examples that I have read of such as appeared to their 
surviving kindred and acquaintance, after they had been slaughtered 
in the Warrs, beseeching them to perform unto their bodies the 
Sacred Funeral Rites that their Ghosts might return into Rest, for 
which many have consulted with the Oracles to be informed whether 
the deceased deserved Burial, because they held it unlawful to bury 
Murtherers, Incestuous and Sacriligious, persons, which Nature her 
self doth also seem to hold if this following Relation be not false : 
which was, " That some Learned men returning from Persia where 
" they had been to see the King Cosroes, by the way interr'd a dead 
" Carcase which they found unburied : And in the following night the 
" Ghost of an Ancient Matron, as if it had been the Spirit of the 
"World or Madam Nature her self, appeard unto them, saying. Why 
" Interr ye that nefarious Carcase ? let the Doggs devoicre it ; TJie 
" Earth who is the Mother of us all admitts not of that ma?i that 
depraves his Mother: So returning they found the Carcase yet 
" unburied. 
24. To confirm the verity of Astral Shirits proper, and their „, , . 
■ . ■' J r r J •j-],^ rnnrlusion 
returnmg, I shall conclude this Chapter with the Example of the of this Chap-

--- PAGE 606 ---
5o8 Book II. A Discouvse concerning 
terwith an famous Aristeus the Poet who " in the Isle Martnora dyed suddainly, 
example. u ^j. ^vhich instant a certain Philosopher of Athens arriving there, 
" affirmed, That he had lately been hi Conipatiy and discoiirst with him. 
*' In the mean time going to Bury him they found him yet alive, but 
" never after that had he any constant residence amongst Mortals. 
" Seven years after that he was seen at Proconnestis his native Town, 
" and remaind a while composing several Poems and Verses called 
Aritnaspei, and then vanished. In Metapontis he was seen 300 
" years after that, charging that Apollo's Altar should be erected by 
"the name of Aristeus Proco)i7iesiiis. The like stories are reported of 
Apolloniits, and Pythagoras, whom their followers would have to be 
Ubiquitaryes, affirming, That at one instajitof time they were seen in 
several places thoiisands of niiles in distance. And though in ''lain- 
blichus who hath wrote the Life of Pythagoras, in Philostratus that 
wrote the Life of Apollo7iitcs Tyanus, there be many fabulous things 
reported as to the Astral Spirits separation, and return unto the 
body ; Yet I have sufficiently here endeavoured to separate the true 
from the more Poetical part in this particular Subject of the starry 
Spirits belonging to every individual man and woman, and their 
returning after the body falls away. 
Chap. IV. 
Of Astral Spirits or separate Dcemons in all their distinctions., 
names, and natures., and places of Habitation, and what may be 
wrought by their Assistance. 
I. TT Aving in the foregoing Chapter sufficiently illustrated the 
^^ornmonf'"'^ X 1 nature of the Astral Spirits proper, that belong to every 
individual ; The subject of this present Chapter shall be of 
Astral Spirits separate ; which are not constitute to any peculiar 
work or service, but do only, according to their nature and temper, 
[t sic] haunt such places in the sublunary world as are most correspendentf 
to their natures, and existence./ 
TheSpi^rits 50. 2. According to the Judgment of Magicians, the Seven Planets 
have seven starry Spirits peculiar to themselves, whose natures are 
answerable to that peculiar Planet under which they are constitute. 
And they are said to be substitute under the seven Cselestial Angels 
that govern the influences of the superiour Spheres, being equal in 
of the Planets.

--- PAGE 607 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. iv. 
509 
their name and continuance witli that planet whose Spirit they are, 
that is, till the Consummation of all things visible. 
3. And in that houre, month, day or year, wherein their Planet The Power of 
hath the most dominion, then is their efficacy most prevalent, and '^^ Planets, 
their operation the most powerful upon inferiour bodies, whether to 
the destruction or prosperity of that animal vegitative or mineral 
subject to their Influences, according to the dignification of the 
Planet at that instant Dominion ; for if ill affected, their nature is to 
blast with Mildew, Lightning, and Thunder any Vegetative proper 
to their Planet ; To deprive any Animal of sight or the motion of 
the nerves under their Dominion ; And lastly, bring Plagues, Pesti- 
lence, and Famine, Storms, and Tempests, or on the Contrary to bring 
sweet and excellent Influences upon Animals, or Vegetatives under 
their Planetary Regiment, if well and honourably dignified. 
4. Innumerable are the Spirits that inhabit the Aiery Region, Spirits of the 
germinating amongst themselvs as Magicians affirm, and begetting 
one another after a Mystical manner. It is their property to be instant 
in storms and boistrous weather, which is said to be joy and delight 
unto them ; And in such a season they may with most facility be 
calld upon, and make their appearance, which they do accordingly 
to their age, and youthfulness, seeming young or old at their appear- 
ance answerable to their years. Besides they march in mighty 
Troops through the Aiery Region, waging warr amongst themselves, 
and destroying one anothers beings or Existences, after which they 
are reduced to the primary source or nature of the Starrs. This is 
likewise to be observed that according to the Language, Vigour, Life, 
and Habit of that Region wherein they live, such is their Habit, 
Language, and Ability, one Caterva or Company being ignorant of 
their Neighbours, or Enemies Language, so that they have need of the 
Assistance of such Spirits as dwell in omnibus Elementis, to be their 
Interpreters. 
5. And doubtless from hence arise the various deceptions that* Their Actions, 
men are incident unto in their judgments of Apparitions, perswading [* \h\xitext] 
themselves that they are portents and foretokens of Warr and Famine, 
when such numerous Spirits are beheld Fighting or Marching either 
in the Air, Earth, or Water : whereas it is nothing else but the bare 
effect of the Natures and Tempers of such Aerial beings to fight and 
randevouse immediately after sun-set, or else later in the Summer 
evenings, which is their principal time of such Conventions. And 
though it must be confest that such Spirits may be, and are the 
Devils Instruments as appertaining to the Kingdom whereof he is 
Ruler ; Yet considered in themselves, their Nature is wholly harmless, 
as to ought that may be called innate Evill, having nothing in them

