n this 
case. pag. 68. 
Of foure capitall crimes objected against 
witches, all fullie answered & confuted as 
frivolous. pag. 70./ 
S s. ii, A request to such readers as loath to heare 
or read filthie & bawdie matters (which of 
necessitie are here to be inserted) to passe 
over eight chapters. pag. 72. 
U The fourth Booke. 
/~\F witchmoongers opinions concerning e- 
vill spirits, how they frame themselves 
in more excellent sort than God made 
us. _ Pag. 73. 
Of bawdie Incubus and Succubus, and 
whether the action of venerie may be per- 
formed betweene witches and dive! 
and when witches first yeelded to I 
cubus, pag. 74. 
Of the divels visible and invisible dealing 
with witches in the waie of lecherie. pag.76. 
That the power of generation is both out- 
wardlie and inwardlie impeached by 
witches, and of divers that had their geni- 
tals taken from them by witches, and by 
the same means againe restored, pag. 77. 
Of bishop Sylvanus his leacherie opened & 
covered againe, how maids having yellow 
haire are most combred with Incubus, how 
maried men are bewitched to use othermens 
wives, and to refuse their owne. pag. 79. 
How to procure the dissolving of bewitched 
love, also to enforce a man (how proper 
so ever he be) to love an old hag : and 
of a bawdie tricke of a priest in Gelder- 
land. pag. 80. 
Of divers saincts and holie persons, which 
were exceeding bawdie and lecherous, 
and by certeine miraculous meanes became 
chast. pag. 81. 
Certeine popish and magicall cures, for them 
that are bewitched in their privities, p. 82. 
A strange cure doone to one that was mo- 
lested with Incubus. pag. 83. 
A confutation of all the former follies touch- 
ing Incubus, which by examples and 
proofes of like stuffe is shewed to be flat 
knaverie, wherein the carnall copulation 
with spirits is overthrowne. _ pag. 85. 
That Incubus is a naturall disease, with 
remedies for the same, besides magicall 
cures herewithall expressed. pag. 86. 
The censure of G. Chaucer, upon the knave- 
rie of Incubus. pag. 88. 
If TJie fift Booke. 
transformations, ridiculous examples 
brought by the adversaries for the con- 
firmation of their foolish doctrine. Pag.89. 
Absurd reasons brought by Bodin, & such 
others, for confirmation of transforma- 
tions, pag. 93. 
Of a man turned into an asse, and returned 
againe into a man by one of Bodins 
witches : S. Augustines opinion thereof, 
cap. 94. 
A summarie of the former fable, with a refu- 
tation thereof, after due examination of 
the same. pag. 97. 
That the bodie of a man cannot be turned 
into the bcdie of a beast by a witch, is 
prooved by strong reasons, scriptures, and 
authorities. pag. 99. 
The witchmongers objections concerning 
Nabuchadnez-zar answered, & their errour 
concerningLycanthropia confuted, pag. lor. 
A speciall objection answered concerning 
transportations, with the consent of diverse 
writers thereupon. pag. 103. 
The witchmongers objection concerning the 
historie of Job answered. pag. 103. 
What severall sortes of witches are men- 
tioned in the scriptures, & how the word 
witch is there applied. pag. 109.

--- PAGE 89 ---
The Contents. 
XXXI 
H The sixt Booke. 
THe exposition of this Hebrue word Cha- 
saph, wherin is answe/red the objection 
conteined in Exodus 22. to wit: Thou shalt 
not suffer a witch to live, and of Simon 
iVIagus. Acts. 8. _ pag. iii. 
The place of Deuteronomie expounded, 
wherein are recited all kind of witches ; 
also their opinions confuted, which hold 
that they can worke worke* such miracles 
as are imputed unto them. _ pag. 113. 
That women have used poisoning in all ages 
more than men, & of the inconvenience of 
poisoning _ pag. it6. 
Of divers poisoning practises, otherwise 
called veneficia, committed in Italic, 
Genua, Millen.Wittenberge, also how they 
were discovered and executed, pag. 119. 
A great objection answered concerning this 
kind of witchcraft called Veneficium. 
pag. . 120. 
In what kind of confections that witchcraft, 
which is called Veneficium, consisteth : 
of love cups, and the same confuted by 
poets. pag. 121. 
It is prooved by more credible writers, that 
love cups rather ingender death through 
venome, than love by art : and with what 
toies they destroie cattell, and procure 
love. p. 123. 
John Bodin triumphing against J. Wier is 
overtaken with lalse grecke & false inter- 
pretation thereof. p. 125- 
H The seventh Booke. 
OF the Hebrue woord Ob, what it signifieth 
where it is found, of Pythonisses called 
Ventriloque, who they be, & what the r 
practises are, experience and examples 
thereof shewed. Pag. 126. 
How the lewd practise of the Pythonist of 
Westwell came to light, and by whome 
she was examined ; and that all hir dia- 
bolicall speach was but ventriloquie and 
plaine cousenage, which is prooved by hir 
owne confession. pag. 130. 
Bodins stuffe concerning the Pythonist of 
Endor, with a true storie of a counterfeit 
Dutchman. pag. 132. 
Of the great oracle of Apollo the Pythonist, 
and how men of all sorts have beene de- 
ceived, and that even the apostles have 
mistaken the nature of spirits, with an un- 
answerable argument, that spirits can 
take no shapes. pag. 133. 
Why Apollo was called Pytho wherof those 
witches were called Pythonists : Gregorie 
his letter to the divell. pag. 136. 
Apollo, who was called Pytho, compared to 
the Rood of grace : Gregories letter to the 
divell cofuted. p. 137. 
How diverse great clarkes and good authors 
have beene abused in this matter of spirits 
through false reports, and by means of 
their credulitie have published lies, which 
are confuted by Aristotle and the scrip- 
tures, pag. 138. 
Of the witch of Endor, and whether she 
accomplished the raising of Samuel trulie, 
or by deceipt ; the opinion of some divines 
hereupon. p. 139. 
That Samuel was not raised indeed, and S s. ii. \ 
how Bodin and all papists dote herin, and 
that soules cannot be raised by witch- 
craft, pag. 140. 
That neither the divell nor Samuel was 
raised, but that it was a meere cousenage, 
according to the guise of our Pythonists. 
pag. _ _ _ 142. [*s/i;] 
The objection of the witchmongers concern- 
ing this place fullie answered, and what cu:- 
cumstances are to be considered for the un- 
derstandmgof this storie, which is plainelie 
opened from the beginning of the 28.chapt. 
of the I. Samuel, to the 12. verse, pag. 143. 
The 12. 13. & 14. verses of i. Sam. 28. ex- 
pounded : wherein is shewed that Saule 
was cousened and abused by the witch, & 
that Samuel was not raised, is prooved by 
the witches/ owne talke. pag. 146. S s. iii. 
The residue of i. Sam. 28. expounded : 
wherein is declared how cunninglie this 
witch brought Saule resolutelie to beleeve 
that she raised Samuel, what words are 
used to colour the cousenage, & how all 
might also be wrought by ventriloquie. 
p. 148. 
Opinions of some learned men, that Samuel 
was indeed raised, not by the witches art 
or power, but by the speciall miracle of 
God, that there are no such visions in these 
our daies, and that our witches cannot doo 
the like. pag. 151. 
Of vaine apparitions, how people have beene 
brought to feare bugs, which is partlie re- 
formed by preaching of the gospel, the 
true effect of Christes miracles, pag. 152. 
Witches miracles copared to Christs, that 
God is the creator of a! things, of Apollo, 
and of his names and portraiture, pag. 154. 
H The eight Booke. 
T^Hat miracles are ceased. 156. 
-'■ I'hat the gift of prophesie is ceased. 
Pag. 158. 
That Oracles are ceased. P^g- r6o. 
A tale written by manie grave authors, and 
beleeved by manie wise men of the divels 
death. An other storie written by papists, 
and beleeved of all catholikes, approoving 
the divels honestie, conscience, and cour- 
tesie. pag. 162. 
The judgments of the ancient fathers touch- 
ing oracles, and their abolishment, and 
that they be now transferred from Delphos 
to Rome. p. 164. 
Where and wherein couseners, witches, and 
preests were woont to give oracles, and to 
worke their feats. pag. 165. 
^ The luiith Booke. 
'X'He Hebnie word Kasam expounded, and 
^ how farre a Chrislian may conjecture 
of things to come. Pag. 167.

--- PAGE 90 ---
xxxii 
The Contents. 
* sic] 
[♦ doe] 
S s. iii. 
S s iiii. 
Proofes by the old and new testament, that 
certaine observations of the weather are 
lawfuli. pag. i68. 
That certeine observations are indifferent, 
certeine ridiculous, and certeine impious, 
whence that cunning is derived of Apollo, 
and of Aruspices. pag, 169. 
The predictions of soothsaiers & lewd 
preests, the prognostications of astrono- 
mers and physicians allowable, divine 
prophesies holie and good. pag 171. 
The diversitie of true prophets, of Urim, 
and of the prophe' icall use of the twelve 
pretious stones conteined therein, of the 
divine voice called Eccho. pag. 172. 
Of prophesies conditionall : whereof the pro- 
phesies in the old testament dee* intreat, 
and bywhom they were published ; witch- 
mongers answers to the objections against 
witches supernaturall actions. pag. 173. 
What were the miracles expressed in the 
old testament, and what are they in the 
new te5-tament: and that we are not now to 
looke for anie more miracles. pag. 175. 
T/ie tenth Booke. 
T^He interpretation of the Hcbrue word 
Onen, of the vanitie of dreames, and 
divinations thereupon. Pag. 177. 
Of divine, naturall, & casuall dreames. with 
the differing causes and eff"ects, pag. 178. 
The opinion of divers old writers touching 
dreames, and how they varie in noting 
the causes therof. p. 179. 
Against interpreters of dreames, of the ordi- 
narie cause of dreames, Hemingius his 
opinion of diabolicall drearies, the inter- 
pretation of dreames cea-ed. pag. 180./ 
That neither witches, nor anie other, can 
either by words or herbs, thrust into the 
mind of a sleeping man, what cogitations 
or dreames they list ; and whence magi- 
call dreames come. pa-g. 181. 
How men have beene bewitched, cousened 
or abused by dreames to dig and search 
for monie. pag. 182. 
The art & order to be used in digging for 
monie, revealed by dreames, how to pro- 
cure pleasant dreames, of morning and 
midnight dreames. p. 183. 
Sundrie receipts & ointments, made and 
used for the transportation of witches, and 
other miraculous effects : an instance 
thereof reported and credited by some 
that are learned. pag- 184. 
A confutation of the former follies, as well 
tOcerning ointments, dreams, &c. as also 
of the assemblie of witches, and of their 
consultations and bankets at sundrie 
places, and aU in dreames. pa-g- 185. 
That most part of prophesies in the old 
testament were revealed in dreams, that 
we are not now to looke for such revela- 
tions, of some who have drempt of that 
which hath come to passe, that dreames 
proove contrarie, Nebuchadnez zars-'* rule 
to know a true expositor of dreames. 
pag. 187. 
If The eleventh Booke. 
'X'He Hebrue word Nahas expounded, of 
the art of augurie, who invented it, 
how slovenlie a science it is: the multitude 
of sacrifices and sacrificers of the heathen, 
and the causes thereof. Pag. i8g. 
Of the Jewes sacrifice to Moloch, a discourse 
thereupon, and of Purgatorie. pag. 190. 
The Camba's* crueltie, of popish sacrifices 
exceeding in tyrannie the Jewes or Gen- 
tiles, pag. 191. 
The superstition of the heathen about the 
element of fier, and how it grew in such 
reverence among them, of their corrup- 
tions, and that they had some inkling of 
the godiie fathers dooings in that be- 
halfe. pag. 191. 
Of the Romane sacrifices, of the estimation 
they had of auguiie, of the lawe of the 
twelve tables. P^g- 192. 
Colleges of augurors, their office, their num- 
ber, the signification of augurie, that the 
practisers of that art were couseners, their 
profession, their places of exercise, their 
apparell, their superstition. pa.g. 193. 
The times and seasons to exercise augurie, 
the maner and order thereof, of the cere- 
monies thereunto belonging. pag- 195. 
Upon what signes and tokens augurors did 
prognosticate, observations touching the 
inward and outward parts of beasts, with 
notes of beasts behaviour in the slaughter- 
house, pag 196. 
A confutation of augurie, Plato his reverend 
opinion thereof, of contrarie events, & 
false predictions. p. 196. 
The cousening art of sortilege or lotarie, 
practised especiailie by Aegyptian vaga- 
bonds, of allowed lots, of Pythagoras his 
lot, &c. pag. 197. 
Of the Cabalisticall art, consisting of tradi- 
tions and unwritten verities learned without 
booke, and of the division thereof, cap. 198. 
When, how, and in what sort sacrifices were 
first ordained, and how they were pro- 
phaned, and how the pope corrupteth the 
sacraments of Christ. pag. 200. 
Of the objects whereupon the augurors used 
to prognosticate, with certeine cautions 
and notes. pag- 201. 
The division of augurie, persons admittable 
into the colleges of augurie, of their super- 
stition, pag- 202./ 
Of the common peoples fond and supersti- 
tious collections and observations, pag. 203. 
How old writers varie about the matter, the 
maner, and the meanes, whereby things 
augurificall are mooved. pag- 205. 
How ridiculous an art augurie is, how Cato 
mocked it, Aristotles reason against it, 
fond collections of augurors, who allowed, 
and who disallowed it. pag. 206. 
Fond distinctions of the heathen writers,con- 
cerning augurie. pa-g- 208. 
Of naturall and casuall augurie, the one 
allowed, and the other disallowed pag. 208. 
A confutation of casual augurie which is 
meere witchcraft, and upon what uncer- 
leintie those divinations are grounded, 
pag. 209.

--- PAGE 91 ---
The Contents. 
xxxiu 
That figure-casters are witches, the uncer- 
teintie of their art, and of their contradic- 
tions, Cornelius Agrippas sentence against 
judicial] astrologie. pag. 210. 
The subtiltie of astrologers to mainteine 
the credit of their art, why they remaine 
in credit, certeine impieties conteined in 
astrologers assertions. pag. 212. 
Who have power to drive awaie divels with 
their onelie presence, who shall receive of 
God whatsoever they aske in praier, who 
shall obteine everlasting life by meanes of 
constellations, as nativitie-casters affirme. 
pag. 214. 
H The Huelfe Booke. 
'T"He Hebrue word Habar expounded, 
where also the supposed secret force of 
charmes and inchantnients is shewed, and 
the efficacie of words is diverse waies de- 
clared. Pag. 216. 
What is forbidden in scriptures concerning 
witchcraft, of the operation of words, the 
superstition of the Cabalists and papists, 
who crealeth substances, to imitate God 
in some cases is presumption, words of 
sanctification. pag. 217. 
What effect & offense witches charmes bring, 
how unapt witches are, and how unlikelie 
to wotke those things which they are 
thought to doo, what would follow if those 
things were true which are laid to their 
charge. pag. 218. 
Why God forbad the practise of witchcraft, 
the absurditie of the law of the twelve 
tables, whereupon their estimation in 
miraculous actions is grounded, of their 
woonderous works. pag. 220. 
An instance of one arreigned upon the law 
of the twelve tables, whereby the said law 
is prooved ridiculous, of two witches that 
could doo woonders. pag. 22r. 
Lawes provided for the punishment of such 
witches as worke miracles, whereof some 
are mentioned, and of certeine popish 
la^yes published against them. pag. 222. 
Poetical authorities commonlie alledged by 
witchmongers, for the proofe of witches 
miraculous actions, and for confirmation 
of their supematurall power. pag. 223. 
Poetrie and poperie compared in inchant- 
nients,popish witchmongers have more ad- 
vantage herein than protestants. pag. 229. 
Popish periapts, amulets & charmes, agnus 
Dei, a wastcote of proofe, a charme for the 
falling evill, a writing brought to S. Leo 
from heaven by an angell, the vertues 
of S. Saviors epistle, a charme against 
theeves, a writing found in Christs wounds, 
of the crosse, &c. pag. 230. 
H A charme against shot, or a wastcote of 
proofe. Against the falling evill, p. 231. 
A popish periapt or charme, which must 
never be said, but carried about one, 
against theeves. Another amulet, pag. 23 3. 
A papisticall charme. A charme found in 
the ca/non of the masse. Other papisticall 
charmes. pag. 234. A charme of the holie 
crosse. pag. 235. A charme taken out of 
the Primer. pag. 236. 
How to make holie water, and the vertues 
thereof, S. Rufins charme, of the wearing 
& bearing of the name of Jesus, that the 
sacrament of confession & the eucharist 
is of as much efhcacie as other charmes, 
and magnified by L. Vairus. pag. 237, 
Of the noble balme used by Moses, apishhe 
counterfeited in the church of Rome, 
pag. _ 238. 
I he opinion of Ferrarius touching charmes, 
periapts, appensions, amulets, &c. Of 
riomericall medicines, of constant opinion, 
and the effects thereof. pag. 239. 
Of the effects of amulets, the drift of Arge- 
rius Ferrarius in the commendation of 
charmes, &c : foure sorts of Homericall 
medicines, and the choice theieof; of 
imagination. pag. 241. 
Choice of charmes against the falling evill, 
the biting of a mad dog, the stinging of a 
scorpion, the toothach, for a woman in 
travell, for the kings evill, to get a thorne 
out of any member, or a bone out of ones 
throte, charmes to be said fasting, or at 
the gathering of hearbs, for sore eies, to 
open locks, against spirits, for the bots 
in a horsse, and speciallie for the Duke of 
Albas horsse, for sowre wines, &c. pag.242. 
T For the falling evill. pa. 242. Against 
the biting of a mad dog. pag. 243. Against 
the biting of a scorpion. Against the 
toothach. A charme to release a woman 
in travell. To heale the Kings or Queenes 
evill, or anie other sorenesse in the throte. 
A charme read in the Komish church, 
upon saint Blazes daie, that will fetch a 
thorne out of anie place of ones bodie, a 
bone out of the throte, &c : Lect. 3. pag. 
244. A charme for the headach. A 
charme to be said ech morning by a 
witch fasting, or at least before she go 
abroad. Another charme that witches use 
at the gathering of their medicinable 
hearbs. An old womans charme, wher- 
with she did much good in the counttie, 
and grew famous thereby, pag. 245. An- 
other like chaime. A charme to open 
locks. A charme to drive awaie spirits 
that haunt anie house, pag. 246. A prettie 
charme or conclusion lor one possessed. 
Another for the same purpose. Another 
to the same effect. Another charme or 
witchcraft for the same. pag. 247. A 
charme for the bots in a horsse. pag, 248. 
A charme against vineger. pa. 249. 
The inchanting of serpents & snakes, objec- 
tions answered concerning the same ; fund 
reasons whie charmes take effect therein, 
Mahomets pigeon, miracles wrought by 
an Asse at Memphis in Aegypt, popish 
charmes against serpents, of miracle- 
-workers, the taming of snakes, Bodins lie 
of snakes. pag. 249. 
Charmes to carrie water in a sive, to know 
what is spoken of us behind our backs, 
for bleare eies, to make seeds to growe 
well, of images made of wax, to be rid of 
a witch, to hang fiir up, notable authori- 5 s. iiii. v 
ties against waxen images, a storie be- 
wraieng the knaverie of waxen images, 
pag. 256

--- PAGE 92 ---
xxxiv 
TJie Contents. 
If A charme teaching how to hurt whom you 
list with images of wax, &c. pag. 257. 
Sundrie sorts of charmes tending to diverse 
purposes, and first, certeine charmes to 
make taciturnitie in tortures. pag. 259. 
IT Counter charmes against these and all 
other witchcrafts, in the saieng also 
whereof witches are vexed, &c. A charme 
for the choine cough. For corporall or 
spirituall rest, Charmes to find out a 
[Ss. v.] theefe. pag. 260. Another/ waie to find 
out a theefe that hath stolne any thing 
from you. pag. 261. To put out the 
theeves eie. Another waie to find out a 
theefe. pag. 262. A charme to find out 
or spoile a theefe. S. Adalberts cursse or 
charme against theeves. pag 263. Another 
inchantment. pag, 266. 
A charme or experiment to find out a witch. 
pag. 266. 
^ To spoile a theefe, a witch, or any other 
enimie. and to be delivered from the evill. 
pag. 269. A notable charme or medicine 
to pull out an arrowhead, or any such 
thing that sticketh in the flesh or bones, 
and cannot otherwise be had out. Charmes 
[Ss. V. v.] against a quotidian ague. For all maner 
of agues intermittant. Periapts, charac- 
ters, &c : for agues, and to cure all dis- 
eases, and to deliver from all evill. p. 270. 
More charmes for agues, pag. 271. For a 
bloudie /luxe, or rather an issue of bloud. 
Cures CO mmensed and finished by witch- 
craft, pa, 273. Another witchcraft or 
knaverie, practised by the same surgion. 
pag. 275. Another experiment for one 
bewitched. Otherwise. A knacke to 
know whether you be bewitched, or no, 
&c. pag. 276. 
That one witchcraft may lawfullie meete 
with another. pag. 277. 
Who are privileged from witches, what 
bodies are aptest to be bewitched, or to be 
witches, why women are rather witches 
than men, and what they are. pag. 277. 
What miracles witchmongers report to have 
been done by witches words &c : contra- 
dictions of witchmongers among them- 
selves, how beasts are cured hereby, of 
bewitched butter, a charme against 
witches, & a counter charme, the effect of 
charmes and words prooved by L. Vairus 
to be woonderfull. pag. 279. 
^ A charme to find hir that bewitched your 
kine. Another, for all that have bewitched 
any kind of cattell. p. 281. A speciall 
charme to preserve all cattell from witi h- 
craft. pag. 282. 
Lawfull charmes, rather medicinable cures 
for diseased cattell. The charme of 
charmes, and the power thereof, pag. 283. 
^ The charme of charmes. Otherwise. 
pag. 284. 
A confutation of the force and vertue falselie 
ascribed to charmes and amulets, by the 
authorities of ancient writers, both divines 
and physicians. pag. 285. 
IT The xiii, Booke, 
T^He signification of the Hebrue word 
■'■ Hartumim, where it is found written 
in the scriptures, and how it is diverslie 
translated : whereby the objection of 
Pharaos magicians is afterward answered 
in this booke ; also of naturall magicke 
not evill in it selfe. Pag. 287. 
How the philosophers in times past travelled 
for the knowledge of natural! magicke, of 
Salomons knowledge therein, who is to be 
called a naturall magician, a distinctio 
therof, and why it is condemned for witch- 
craft, pag. 288. 
What secrets doo lie hidden, and what is 
taught in naturall magicke, how Gods 
glorie is magnified therein, and that it is 
nothing but the worke of nature, pag. 290. 
What strange things are brought to passe by 
naturall magicke. pag- 291. 
The incredible operation of waters, both 
standing and running ; of wels, lakes, 
rivers, and of their woonderfull effects, 
pag. _ 292. 
The vertues and qualities of sundrie pre- 
tious stones, of cousening Lapidaries, &c. 
pag- 293- 
Whence the pretious stones receive their 
operations, how curious Magicians use 
them, and of their/ seales. pag. 297. 
The sympathie and antipathie of naturall 
and elementarie bodies declared by di- 
verse examples of beasts, birds, plants, 
&c. pag. 301. 
The former matter prooved by manie exam- 
ples of the living and the dead. pag. 303. 
The bewitching venome conteined in the 
bodie of an harlot, how hir eie, hir toong, 
hir beautie and behavior bewitcheth some 
men : of bones and homes yeelding great 
vertue. pag. 304. 
Two notorious woonders and yet not mar- 
velled at. _ pag. 305. 
Of illusions, confederacies, and legierde- 
maine, and how they may be well or ill 
used. _ pag. 307. 
Of private confederacie, and of Krandons 
pigeon. pag. 308. 
Of publike confederacie, and whereof it 
consisteth. pag. 309. 
How men have beene abused with words of 
equivocation, with sundrie examples there- 
of, pag. 309. 
How some are abused with naturall magike, 
and sundrie examples therof when illu- 
sion is added thereunto, of Jacobs pied 
sheepe, and of a blacke Moore, pag. 311. 
The opinion of witchmongers, that divels 
can create bodies, & of Pharaos magicians, 
pag. 312- 
How to produce or make monsters by art 
magike, and why Pharaos magicians 
could not make lice. pa. 313. 
That great matters may be wrought by this 
art, when princes esteeme and mainteine 
it : of divers woonderfull experiments, 
and of strange conclusions in glasses, of 
the art perspective, &c. pag. 315. 
A comparison betwixt Pharaos magicians 
and our witches, and how their cunning 
consisted in juggling knacks. pag. 317. 
That the serpents and frogs were trulie pre- 
sented, and the water poisoned indeed by 
Jannes and Jambres, of false prophets, and 
of their miracles, of Balams asse. pag. 318

