witcherie. 
But God knoweth she had bewitched none, neither insued there anie 
hurt unto anie, by hir imagination, but unto hir selfe. 
And as for the rumbling, it was by occasion of a sheepe, which was 
flawed, and hoong by the wals, so as a dog came and devoured it ; 
whereby grew the noise which I before mentioned : and she being 
now recovered, remaineth a right honest woman, far from such 
impietie, and ashamed of hir imaginations, which she perceiveth to 
have growne through melancholic.

--- PAGE 143 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. II. 
45 
The eleventh Chapter. 
The strange and divers effects of melancholie, and how the same 
humor abounding ifi witches, or rather old women, filleth them 
full of 7nervelloi(s imaginations, and that their confessions are 
not to be credited. 
H. Card, de 
var. rerum. 
cap. 8. 
Jo. IVierus 47. 
de pmst. lib. 6. 
cap. 8. 
H. Card. lib. 8 
de var. rer. 
jUT in truth, this melancholike humor (as the best phy- 
sicians affirme) is the cause of all their strange, impossible, 
and incredible confessions :/ which are so fond, that I 
woonder how anie man can be abused thereby. Howbeit, 
these affections, though they appeare in the mind of man, yet are they 
bred in the bodie, and proceed from this humor, which is the verie 
dregs of bloud, nourishing and feeding those places, from whence pro- 
ceed feares, co/gitations, superstitions, fastings, labours, and such like. 5^- 
This maketh sufferance of torments, and (as some saie) foresight of Aristotle de 
things to come, and preserveth health, as being cold and drie : it ^o"^"^"- 
maketh men subject to leanenesse, and to the quartane ague. They 
that are vexed therewith, are destroiers of themselves, stout to suffer 
injuries, fearefull to offer violence ; except the humor be hot. They 
learne strange toongs with small industrie (as Aristotle and others 
affirme.) 
If our witches phantasies were not corrupted, nor their wils con- 
founded with this humor, they would not so voluntarilie and readilie 
confesse that which calleth their life in question ; whereof they could 
never otherwise be convicted, f. Bodin with his lawyers physicke 
reasoneth contrarilie ; as though melancholie were furthest of all 
from those old women, whom we call witches : deriding the most 
famous and noble physician fohn Wier for his opinion in that behalfe. 
But bicause I am no physician, I will set a physician to him ; namelie 
Erastus, who hath these words, to wit, that These witches, through 
their corrupt phantasie abounding with melancholike humors, by 
reason of their old age, doo dreame and imagine they hurt those 
things which they neither could nor doo hurt ; and so thinke they 
knowe an art, which they neither have learned nor yet understand. 
But whie should there be more credit given to witches, when they 
saie they have made a reall bargaine with the divell, killed a cow, be- 
witched butter, infeebled a child, forespoken hir neighbour, &c : than 
when she confesseth that she transubstantiateth hir selfe, maketh it 
raine or haile, flieth in the aire, goeth invisible, transferreth come in 
the grasse from one field to another? &c. If you thinke that in the 
one their confessions be sound, whie should you saie that they are 
corrupt in the other ; the confession of all these things being made at 
Jo. Bod. con- 
tra Jo. Wie- 
rum.

--- PAGE 144 ---
46 
3. Booke. 
The discoverie 
August, lib. 
de Trinit. 3. 
Idevi. de ci 
vit, Dei. 
Clemens, re- 
fogn. 3 
lamblichus. 
Jo. Wicrus. 
Cardanus. 
Pampia. 
59- 
48. 
one instant, and affirmed with like constancie, or rather audacitie ? 
But you see the one to be impossible, and therefore you thinke 
thereby, that their confessions are vaine and false. The other you 
thinke may be doone, and see them confesse it, and therefore you 
conclude, A posse ad esse ; as being persuaded it is so, bicause you 
thinke it may be so. But I sale, both with the divines, and 
philosophers, that that which is imagined of witchcraft, hath no truth 
of action ; or being besides their ima/gination, the which (for the most 
part) is occupied in false causes. For whosoever desireth to bring to 
passe an impossible thing, hath a vaine, an idle, and a childish per- 
suasion, bred by an unsound mind : for Sance inentis voluntas, 
voluntas rei possibilis est ; The will of a sound mind, is the desire 
of a possible thing./ 
The twelfe Chapter. 
An objection. 
The resolution. 
A forged 
miracle. 
60. 
A confutation of witches confessions, especiallie concerning their 
league. 
jUT it is objected, that witches confesse they renounce the 
faith, and as their confession must be true (or else they 
would not make it :) so must their fault be worthie of 
death, or else they should not be executed. Whereunto 
I answer as before ; that their confessions are extorted, or else pro- 
ceed from an unsound mind. Yea I saie further, that we our selves, 
which are sound of mind, and yet seeke anie other waie of salvation 
than Christ Jesus, or breake his commandements, or walke not in 
his steps with a livelie faith, &c : doo not onlie renounce the faith, 
but God himselfe : and therefore they (in confessing that they forsake 
God, and imbrace sathan) doo that which we all should doo. As 
touching that horrible part of their confession, in the league which 
tendeth to the killing of their owne and others children, the seething 
of them, and the making of their potion or pottage, and the effects 
thereof ; their good fridaies meeting, being the dale of their deliver- 
ance, their incests, with their returne at the end of nine moneths, 
when commonlie women be neither able to go that journie, nor to 
returne, &c ; it is so horrible, unnaturall, unlikelie, and unpossible ; 
that if I should behold such things with mine eies, I should rather 
thinke my selfe dreaming, dronken, or some waie deprived of my 
senses ; than give credit to so horrible and filthie matters. 
How hath the oile or pottage of a sodden child such vertue, as that 
a staffe annointed therewith, can carrie folke in the aire 1 Their 
potable liquor, which (they saie) maketh maisters of that fa/cultie, is it 
not ridiculous ? And is it not, by the opinion of all philosophers,

--- PAGE 145 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. u. 
47 
physicians, and divines, void of such vertue, as is imputed there- 
unto ? 
Their not fasting on fridaies, and their fasting on sundaies, their 
spelling at the time of elevation, their refusall of holie water, their 
despising of superstitious crosses, &c : which are all good steps 
to true christianitie, helpe me to confute the residue of their con- 
fessions. 
The xiil. Chapter. 
A confutation of witches confessions, concerning making of tempests 
and raine : of the tiattirall cause of raine, and that witches or 
divels have no power to doo such things. 
[ND to speake more generallieof all the impossible actions 
referred unto them, as also of their false confessions ; I 
saie, that there is none which acknowledgeth God to be 
onlie omnipotent, and the onlie worker of all miracles, 
nor anie other indued with meane sense, but will denie that the 
elements are obedient to witches, and at their commandement ; or 
that they may at their pleasure send raine, haile, tempests, thunder, 
lightening ; when she being but an old doting woman, casteth a flint 
stone o/ver hir left shoulder, towards the west, or hurleth a little sea 
sand up into the element, or wetteth a broome sprig in water, and 
sprinkleth the same in the aire ; or diggeth a pit in the earth, and 
putting water therein, stirreth it about with hir finger ; or boileth hogs 
bristles, or laieth sticks acrosse upon a banke, where never a drop 
of water is ; or burieth sage till it be rotten : all which things are 
confessed by witches, and affirmed by writers to be the meanes that 
witches use to moove extraordinarie tempests and raine, &c. 
We read in M. Maleficarum, that a little girle walking abroad 
with hir father in his land, heard him complaine of drought, wishing 
for raine, &c. Whie father (quoth the child) I can make it raine/ 
or haile, when and where I list "i He asked where she learned it. 
She said, of hir mother, who forbad hir to tell aniebodie thereof. He 
asked hir how hir mother taught hir? She answered, that hir mother 
committed hir to a maister, who would at anie time doo anie thing 
for hir. Whie then (said he) make it raine but onlie in my field. And 
so she went to the streame, and threw up water in hir maisters name, 
and made it raine presentlie. And proceeding further with hir father, 
she made it haile in another field, at hir fathers request. Hereupon 
he accused his wife, and caused hir to be burned ; and then he new 
christened his child againe : which circumstance is common among 
papists and witchmongers. And howsoever the first part hereof was 
The waies 49. 
that witches 
use to make 
raine, <5?^c. 
Nider. Mai, 
Male/. J. Bod. 
Frier Barth, 
Hcming. 
VanauSy&'c. 
Mai. MaUf. 
par. 2. quce. i. 
cap. 12. 
6i.

--- PAGE 146 ---
48 
3 Booke. 
The discoverie 
He that can 
lie, can steale; 
as he that can 
worke can plaie. 
Jere. i6, 22. 
Dii gentium 
dcemo7iia, 
The gods of the 
gentiles are 
divels. 
62. 
The halurall 
generation of 
haile and raine. 
50. 
Job I, II. 
lb. verse 16. 
prooved, there is no doubt but the latter part was throughlie executed. 
If they could indeed bring these things to passe at their pleasure, then 
might they also be impediments unto the course of all other naturall 
things, and ordinances appointed by God: as, to cause it to hold up, 
when it should raine ; and to make midnight, of high noone : and by 
those meanes (I saie) the divine power should beecome servile to the will 
of a witch, so as we could neither eat nor drinke but by their permission. 
Me thinks Seneca might satisfie these credulous or rather idolatrous 
people, that runne a whorehunting, either in bodie or phansie, after 
these witches, beleeving all that is attributed unto them, to the deroga- 
tion of Gods glorie. He saith, that the rude people, and our ignorant 
predecessors did beleeve, that raine and showers might be procured 
and staled by witches charmes and inchantments : of which kind of 
things that there can nothing be wrought, it is so manifest, that we need 
not go to anie philosophers schoole, to learne the confutation thereof. 
But Jerentte, by the word of God, dooth utterlie confound all that 
which may be devised for the maintenance of that foolish opinion, 
saieng ; Are there any among the gods of the gentiles, that sendeth 
raine, or giveth showers from heaven ? Art not thou the selfe same 
our Lord God i We will trust in thee, for thou dooest and makest 
all these things. I may therefore with Brentucs boldlie saie, that It 
is neither in the power of witches nor divels, to accomplish that 
matter ; but in God onelie. For when exhalations are drawne and 
lifted up from out of the earth, by the power/ of the sunne, into the 
middle region of the aire, the coldnes thereof constreineth and 
thickeneth those vapours ; which being beecome clouds, are dissolved 
againe by the heate of the sunne, wherby raine or haile is ingendred ; 
raine, if by the waie the drops be not frosen and made haile. These/ 
circumstances being considered with the course of the whole scrip- 
ture, it can neither be in the power of witch or divell to procure raine, 
or faire weather 
And whereas the storie of Job in this case is alledged against me 
(wherein a v/itch is not once named) I have particularlie answered it 
else-where. And therefore thus much onelie I say heere ; that Even 
there, where it pleased God (as Calvine saith) to set downe circum- 
stances for the instruction of our grosse capacities, which are not able 
to conceive of spirituall communication, or heavenlie affaires ; the 
divell desireth God to stretch out his hand, and touch all that Job 
hath. And though he seemeth to grant sathans desire, yet God him- 
selfe sent fire from heaven, &c. Where, it is to be gathered, that 
although God said. He is in thine hand : it was the Lords hand that 
punished Job, and not the hand of the divell, who said not. Give me 
leave to plague him ; but, Laie thine hand upon him. And when Job

--- PAGE 147 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 14. 
continued faithfull notwithstanding all his afflictions, in his children, 
bodie and goods ; the divell is said to come againe to God, and to 
saie as before, to wit : Now stretch out thine hand, and touch his Job i, s. 
bones and his flesh. Which argueth as well that he could not doo it, 
as that he himselfe did it not before. And be it here remem- 
bred, that M. Mai. and the residue of the witchmongers denie, „ 
, , _ , !• ^^o-^- Male/. 
that there were any witches in Jobs time. But see more hereof pa. i, qua. 2. 
elsewhere. 
The xiiii. Chapter. 
What would etisue, if witches cotifessions or wi\t'\chmongers opinions 
were true, cottcerning the effects of witchcraft., itichantments, &>c. 
F it were true that witches confesse, or that all writers But these 
write, or that witchmongers report, or that fooles are frise'^rga 
beleeve, we should never have butter in the chearne, the consequen- 
nor cow in the close, nor corne in the field, nor true.^™ 
faire weather abroad, nor health within doores. Or if that which 
is conteined in M. Mai. Bodin, Sec : or in the pamphlets late set 
foorth in English, of witches executions, shuld be true in those 
things that witches are said to confesse, what creature could live in 
securitie 
Or what needed such preparation of warres, or such trouble, 
or charge in that behalfe ? No prince should be able to reigne or live 
in the land. For (as DancEUs saith) that one Marline a witch killed 
the emperour of Gennanie with witchcraft : so would our witches (if 
they could) destroie all our magistrates. One old witch might over- 
throwe an armie roiall : and then what needed we any guns, or wild 
fire, or any other instruments of warre ? A witch might supplie all 
wants, and accomplish a princes will in this behalfe, even without 
charge or bloudshed of his people. 
If it be objected, that witches worke by the divell, and christian 
princes are not to deale that way ; I answer, that few princes disposed 
to battell would make conscience therin, speciallie such as take unjust 
wars in hand, using other helpes, devises, & engines as unlawful! 
and divelish as that ; in whose campe there is neither the rule of 
religion or christian order observed : insomuch as ravishments, 
murthers, blasphemies and / thefts are there most commonlie and 51. 
freelie committed. So that the divell is more feared, and better Mai. Male/. 
served in their camps, than God almightie. Baf^SpiLus. 
But admit that souldiers would be scrupulous herein, the pope 
hath authoritie to dispense therewith ; as in like case he hath / doone, 64. 
by the testimonie of his owne authors and friends. Admit also, that 
throughout all christendome, warres were justly mainteined, and 
H

--- PAGE 148 ---
3- Booke. 
The discoverie 
religion dulie observed in their camps ; yet would the Turke 
and other infidels cut our throtes, or at least one anothers throte, 
with the helpe of their witches ; for they would make no conscience 
thereof. 
The XV. Chapter. 
Examples of forren nations, who in tlieir ivarres nsed the assist- 
ance of witches J of eybiting witches iji Ireland, of two arche7's 
that shot with familiars. 
N the warres between the kings of Denmarke and Stcei'e- 
I land, ij6j. the Danes doo write, that the king of 
Siteveland caried about with him in his campe, foure 
! old witches, who with their charms so qualified the 
Danes, as they were thereby disabled to annoie their enimies : 
insomuch as, if they had taken in hand anie enterprise, they were 
so infeebled by those witches, as they could performe nothing. 
And although this could have no credit at the first, yet in the end, 
one of these witches was taken prisoner, and confessed the whole 
matter ; so as (saith he) the threds, the line, and the characters were 
found in the high waie and water plashes. 
The Irishine7t addict themselves wonderfullie to the credit and 
practise hereof; insomuch as they affirme, that not onelie their children, 
but their cattell, are (as they call it) eybitten, when they fall suddenlie 
sicke, and terme one sort of their witches eybiters ; onelie in that 
respect : yea and they will not sticke to affirme, that they can rime 
either man or beast to death. Also the West Vidians and Mtiscovits 
doo the like : and the Htuines (as Gregorie Ti/ronensis writeth) used 
the helpe of witches in time of war. 
I find another storie written in M. Mai. repeated by Bodin ; that 
one souldier called Ptcmher, dailie through witchcraft killed with his 
bowe and arrowes three of the enimies, as they stood peeping over 
the walles of a castell besieged : so as in the end he killed them 
all quite, saving one. The triall of the archers sinister / dealing, 
and a proofe thereof expressed, is; for that he never lightly failed 
when he shot, and for that he killed them by three a dale ; and had 
shot three arrowes into a rood. This was he that shot at a pennie on 
his sormes head, and made readie another arrow, to have slaine the 
duke Renigrave that commanded it. And doubtlesse, bicause of his 
singular dexterilie in shooting, he was reputed a witch, as dooing that 
which others could not doo, nor thinke to be in the power of man to 
doo : though indeed no miracle, no witchcraft, no impossibilitie nor 
difficultie consisted therein./

--- PAGE 149 ---
of ]]'itchcraft. ci^p. i6. 5 1 
But this latter storie I can requite with a familiar example. For at '^.,f\''''"" , , 
Towne Mn/linff in kent, one of O. il/rtn^'i- justices, upon the com- by an unskilful! 
plaint of many wise men, and a few foolish boies, laid an archer by J"^^"-*^- 
the heeles ; bicause he shot so neere the white at buts. For he was 
informed and persuaded, that the poore man plaied with a flie, other- 
wise called a divell or familiar. And bicause he was certified that the 
archer aforesaid shot better than the common shooting, which he 
before had heard of or scene, he conceived it could not be in Gods 
name, but by inchantment : whereby this archer (as he supposed by 
abusing the Oueenes liege people) gained some one daie two or three 
shillmgs, to the detriment of the commonwealth, and to his ov.'nc 
inriching. And therefore the archer was severelie punished, to the 
great encouragement of archers, and to the wise example of justice; 
but speciallie to the overthrowe of witchcraft. And now againe to 
our matter. 
The xvi. Chapter. 
Authorities cotidemning the fantasticall confessions of witches, and 
how a popish doctor taketh upon him to disproove the same. 
|ERTEINE generall councels, by their decrees, have 
condemned the confessions and erronious creduiitie 
of witches, to be vaine, fantasticall and fabulous. 
And even those, which are parcell of their league. 
wherupon our witchmongers doo so build, to wit ; their night 
walkings and meetings with Herodias, and / the Pagan gods : at 66. 
which time they should passe so farre in so little a space on cock- 
horsse ; their transubstantiation, their eating of children, and their 
pulling of them fi'om their mothers sides, their entring into mens 
houses, through chinks and little holes, where a flie can scarselie 
wring out, and the disquieting of the inhabitants, &c : all which are 
not onelie said by a generall councell to be meere fantasticall, and 
imaginations in dreames ; but so afiirmed by the ancient writers. 
The words of the councell are these ; It may not be omitted, that concH.Acquirens 
certeine wicked women following sathans provocations, being seduced d<-cn-t^2b.qua. 
, , 5. can. i-pistopi, 
by the illusion of divels, beleeve and professe, that m the night times Aiifinst. dc spiri- 
they ride abroad with Diana,\\\G. goddesse of the Pagans, or else with i'' '^Fn'///"p",l^ 
Herodias, with an innumerable multitude, upon certeine beasts, and f""*' 
passe over mania countries and nations, in the silence of the night, GHHandus de 
and doo whatsoever those fairies or ladies command, &c. And it 
followeth even there ; Let all ministers therefore in their severall cures, 
preach to Gods people, so as they may knowe all these things to be 
false, &c. It followeth in the same councell; Therefore, whosoever 
beleeveth that any creature may be either created by them, or else 
$ort. niimcio. 6.

--- PAGE 150 ---
52 
3- Booke. 
The discoverie 
In histor. vel 
VI til sancti Ger- 
mani. 
53. 
Novus Mai. 
Mai in qttte. de 
strigib. cap. 21. 
22. 23, Gt'C. 
67. 
Bar. Spinfus. 
Mai. Male/. 
Luf-. 2%. in qua. 
de strigib. 
changed into better or worsse, or be any way transformed into any 
other kind or likenes of any, but of the creator himselfe, is assuredlie 
an infidell, and woorsse than a Pagan. 
And if this be credible, then all these their bargaines and assem- 
blies, &c : are incredible, which are onelie ratified by certeine foolish 
and extorted confessions ; and by a fable of S. Germane, who 
watched the fairies or witches, being at a reere banket, and through 
his holinesse / staled them, till he sent to the houses of those neigh- 
bours, which seemed to be there, and found them all in bed ; and so 
tried, that these were divels in the likenesse of those women. Which 
if it were as true, as it is false, it might serve well to confute this 
their meeting and night-walking. For if the divels be onlie present 
in the likenesse of witches, then is that false, which is attributed to 
witches in this behalfe. 
But bicause the old hammar of Sprenger and Institor, in their 
old Malleo Maleficaricm, was insufficient to knocke downe this 
councell ; a yoong beetle-head called Frier Bariholomaus Spinetis 
hath made a new leaden beetle, to beate downe the councell, and 
to kill these old women. Wherein he counterfeiting / Aesops asse, 
claweth the pope with his heeles : affirming upon his credit, that the 
councell is false and erronious ; bicause the doctrine swarveth from 
the popish church, and is not authenticall but apocryphall ; saieng 
(though untrulie) that that counceff was not called by the commande- 
ment and pleasure of the pope, nor ratified by his authoritie, which 
(saith he) is sufficient to disanuU all councels. For surelie (saith this 
frier, which at this instant is a cheefe inquisitor) if the words of this 
councell were to be admitted, both I, and all my predecessors had 
published notorious lies, and committed manie injurious executions ; 
whereby the popes themselves also might justlie be detected of error, 
contrarie to the catholike beleefe in that behalfe. Marrie he saith, 
that although the words and direct sense of this councell be quite 
contrarie to truth and his opinion ; yet he will make 
an exposition thereof, that shall somewhat mitigate 
the lewdnes of the same ; and this he saith 
is not onlie allowable to doo, but 
also meritorious. Marke 
the mans words, 
and judge his 
meaning;.

