r such miracles have beene 
latelie printed, whereof diverse have beene bevvraied: all the residue 
doubtles, if triall had beene made, would have beene found like unto 
these. But some are more finelie handled than othersome. Some 
J. Bod in. lib. 
de dipmon.%. 
cap. J. 
PON the like tales dooth Bodin build his doctrine, calling 
them Atheists that will not beleeve him, adding to this 
kind of witchcraft, the miraculous works of diverse 
maidens, that would spue pins, clowts, &c: as one Agnes

--- PAGE 205 ---
of Wiichcra/L 
Chap. 4. 
have more advantage by the simplicitie of the audience, some by the 
majestie and countenance of the confederates ; as namehe, that 
cousening of the holie maid of Kent. Some escape utterlie unsus- 
pected, some are prevented by death; so as that waie their exami- 
nation is untaken. Some are weakelie examined: but the most part 
are so reverenced, as they which suspect them, are rather called to 
their answers, than the others. 
The fourth Chapter. 
0/ the great oracle of Apollo the Pythonist, and how men of all 
sorts have beeii deceived, and that even the apostles have mistaken 
the tiattire of spirits, with an unanswerable argument, that spirits * 
can take no shapes. 
|lTH this kind of witchcraft, Apollo and his oracles abused The am- 
and cousened the whole world: which idoll was so famous, gks''of°ora- 
that I need not stand long in the description thereof. 
The princes and monarchs of the earth reposed no small 
confidence therein: the preests, which lived thereupon, were so 
cunning, as they also overtooke almost all the godlie and learned 
men of that age, partlie with their doubtful! answers; as that which 
was made unto Pyrrhus, in these words, Aio te Aeacida Romanos 
vincere posse, and to Crcesus his ambassadours in these words, Si 
Croesus arma Persis inferat, magnum imperium evertat ; and other- 
wise thus, Crcesus Halin / penetrans, fiiagnam subvertet opum vim : or ij^. 
thus, Crcesus perdet Halin, trangressus phirima regna, &'c: partlie 
through confederacie, whereby they knew mens errands yer they 
came, and partlie by cunning, as promising victorie upon the sacri- 
ficing of some person of such account, as victorie should rather be 
neglected, than the murther accomplished. And if it were, yet should The subtii- 
thei-e be such conditions annexed thereunto, as alwaies remained ^'igj"^""^*" 
unto them a starting hole, and matter enough to cavill upon; as that 
the partie sacrificed must be a virgin, no bastard, &c. Furthermore, 
of two things onelie proposed, and where yea or naie onelie dooth 
answer the question, it is an even laie, that an idiot shall conjecture 
right. So as, if things fell out contrarie, the fault was alwaies in the 
interpretor, and not in the oracle or the prophet. But what mervell, 
(I sale) though the multitude and common people have beene abused 
herein; since lawiers, philosophers, physicians, astronomers, divines, 
generall councels, and princes have with great negligence and 
ignorance been deceived and seduced hereby, as swallowing up and 
de/vouring an inveterate opinion, received of their elders, without due 100- 
examination of the circumstance ?

--- PAGE 206 ---
io8 7 Booke. The discoverie 
Howbeit, the godlie and learned fathers (as it appeereth) have 
alwaies had a speciall care and respect, that they attributed not unto 
God such divelish devises; but referred them to him, who indeed is 
the inventer and author thereot, though not the personall executioner, 
in maner and forme as they supposed : so as the matter of faith was 
not thereby by them impeached. But who can assure himselfe not to 
John. 20, 9. be deceived in matters concerning spirits, when the apostles them- 
selves were so far from knowing them, as even after the resurrection 
of Christ, having heard him preach and expound the scriptures, all 
his life time, they shewed themselves not onelie ignorant therein, but 
also to have misconceived thereof.'' Did not the apostle Thomas 
thinke that Christ himselfe had beene a spirit; until Christ told him 
plainelie, that a spirit was no such creature, as had flesh and bones, 
the which (he said) Thomas might see to be in him 1 And for the 
further certifieng and satisfieng of his mind, he commended unto him 
his hands to be scene, and his sides to be felt. Tho7nas, if the 
answer be true that some make hereunto, to wit : that spirits take 
^35- formes and / shapes of bodies at their pleasure, might have answered 
Christ, and remaining unsatisfied might have said ; Oh sir, what do 
you tell me that spirits have no flesh and bones ? Why they can 
take shapes and formes, and so perchance have you doone. Which 
argument all the witchmongers in the world shall never be able to 
answere. 
Some of them that mainteine the creation, the transformation, the 
transportation, and transubstantiation of witches, object that spirits are 
not palpable, though visible, and answer the place by me before cited: 
so as the feeling and not the seeing should satisfie Thomas. But 
he that shall well weigh the text and the circumstances thereof, shall 
perceive, that the fault of Thomas his incredulitie was secondlie 
bewraied, and condemned, in that he would not trust his owne eies, 
nor the view taken by his fellow apostles, who might have beene thought 
too credulous in this case, if spirits could take shapes at their pleasure. 
John. 20, 29. Jesus saith to him; Bicause thou hast scene (and not, bicause thou 
hast felt) thou beleevest. Item he saith; Blessed are they that 
beleeve and see not (and not, they that beleeve and feele not.) 
Whereby he noteth that our corporall eies may discerne betwixt a 
spirit and a naturall bodie; reprooving him, bicause he so much 
relied upon his externall senses, in cases where faith should have 
prevailed; & here, in a matter of faith revealed in the word, would 
not credit the miracle which was exhibited unto him in most naturall 
and sensible sort. 
En1st.foi.b2. Howbeit, Erastiis saith, and so dooth Hyperius, Hemingius, 
DancEUs, M. Mai. Bodi/i, Qt'c. that evill spirits eate, drinke, and keepe

--- PAGE 207 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 5. 109 
companie with men, and that they can take palpable formes of bodies, 
producing examples thereof, to wit: Spectrum Germanician seu 
Atigiistanum, and the angell whose feet Lot washed ; as though 
bicause God can indue his messengers with bodies at his pleasure, 
therefore the divell and everie spirit can doo the like. How the 
eleven apostles were in this case deceived, appeareth in Luke. 24. and ^■^^^■^\'(^^\ 
in Mark. 16. as also in Matth. 14. where the apostles and / disciples Mat. 14, 16. 
were all deceived, taking Christ to be a spirit, when he walked on the 
sea. And why might they not be deceived herein, as well as in that 
they thought Christ had spoken of a temporall kingdome, when he 
preached of the kingdome of hea/ven 1 Which thing they also much Matth. 20. 
misconceived; as likewise when he did bid them beware of the Matt. 16, n. 
leven of the Pharisies, they understood that he spake of materiall 
bread. 
The fift Chapter. 
Why Apollo was called Pytho whereof those witches were called 
Pythojiists : Gregorie his letter to the divell. 
UT to returne to our oracle of Apollo at Delphos, who 
was called Pytho, for that Apollo slue a serpent so called, 
whereof the Pythonists take their name : I praie you con- 
sider well of this tale, which I will trulie rehearse out of 
the ecclesiasticall historie, written by Eusebius, wherein you shall see Eusib. lib. 
the absurditie of the opinion, the cousenage of these oraclers, and the 
deceived mind or vaine opinion of so great a doctor bewraied and 
deciphered altogither as followeth. 
Gregorie Neoccesariensis in his jornie and waie to passe over the 
Alpes, came to the temple of Apollo : where Apollos priest living 
richlie upon the revenues and benefit proceeding from that idoll, did 
give great intertainement unto Gregorie, and made him good cheare. 
But after Gregorie was gone, Apollo waxed dumbe, so as the priests 
gaines decaied: for the idoll growing into contempt, the pilgrimage 
ceased. The spirit taking compassion upon the priests case, and upon 
his greefe of mind in this behalfe, appeared unto him, and told him 
flatlie, that his late ghest Gregorie was the cause of all his miserie. 
For (saith the divell) he hath banished me, so that I cannot returne 
without a speciall licence or pasport from him. It was no need to 
bid the priest make hast, for immediatlie he tooke pbst horsses, and 
galloped after Gregorie, till at length he overtooke him, and then 
expostulated with him for this discourtesie profered in recompense of 
his good cheare; and said, that if he would not be so good unto him, 
as to write his letter to the divell in his behalfe, he should be utterlie/

--- PAGE 208 ---
iio y-Booke. The discoverie 
ijy. undone. To be short, his importunitie was such, that he obtained 
Gregorie his letter to the divell, who wrote unto him in maner and 
forme following, word for word: Permitto tibi redire i7i locum iuu))i, 
agere qucB consuevisti ; which is in English; I am content thou 
returne into thy place, and doo as thou wast woont. Immediatlie 
upon the receipt of this letter, the idoll spake as before. And here 
Note the is to be noted, that as well in this, as in the execution of all their 
oforac^es^ Other oracles and cousenages, the answers were never given Ex tem- 
pore, or in that dale wherein the question was demanded, because 
forsooth they expected a vision (as they said) to be given the night 
following, whereby the cousenage might the more easilie be wrought./ 
102. 
Zach, 10. 
138. 
in titttlo Box- 
ley. 
The sixt Chapter. 
Apollo, who was called Pytho, compared to the Rood of grace : 
Gregories letter io the divell confuted. 
I HAT need manie words to confute this fable? For if 
Gregorie had beene an honest man, he would never have 
willinglie permitted, that the people should have beene 
further cousened with such a lieng spirit: or if he had 
beene halfe so holie as Eusebius maketh him, he would not have con- 
sented or yeelded to so lewd a request of the priest, nor have written 
such an impious letter, no not though good might have come thereof 
And therefore as well by the impossibilitie and follie conteined therein, 
as of the impietie (whereof I dare excuse Gregorie) you maie perceive it 
to be a lie. Me thinks they which still mainteine that the divell made 
answer in the idoll of Apollo, &c: maie have sufficient persuasion to 
revoke their erronious opinions: in that it appeareth in record, that 
such men as were skilfull in augurie, did take upon them to give 
oracles at Delphos, in the place of Apollo : of which number Tisanius 
the Sonne of Antiochus was one. But vaine is the answer of idols. 
Our Rood of grace, with the helpe of little S. Rumball, was not 
inferior to the idoll of Apollo : for these could / not onlie worke 
externall miracles, but manifest the internall thoughts of the hart, I 
beleeve with more livelie shew, both of humanitieandalso of divinitie, 
than the other. As if you read M. Lamberts booke of the peram- 
bulation of Kent, it shall partlie appeare. But if you talke with them 
that have beene beholders thereof, you will be satisfied herein. And 
yet in the blind time of poperie, no man might (under paine of 
damnation) nor without danger of death, suspect the fraud. Naie, 
what papists will yet confesse they were idols, though the wiers that 
made their eies gogle, the pins that fastened them to the postes to

--- PAGE 209 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. a. 1 1 1 
make them seeme heavie, were scene and burnt together with the 
images themselves, the knaverie of the priests bewraied, and everie 
circumstance thereof detected and manifested ? 
The seventh Chapter. 
How diverse great clarkes and good authors have beene abused in 
this matter of spirits through false reports, and by 7neanes of 
their credulitie have published lies, which are confuted by Aris- 
totle and the scriptures. 
LUTARCH, Livie, and Valerius Maximus, with manie 
other grave authors, being abused with falfe reports, 
write that in times past beasts spake, and that images 
could have spoken and wept, and did let fall drops of 
blood, yea and could walk from place to place: which they / sale was 
doone by procuration of spirits. But I rather thinke with Aristotle, 
that it was brought to passe Ho7ninum 6^ sacerdotmn deceptionibus, 
to wit: by the cousening art of craftie knaves and priests. And there- 
fore let us follow Esaies advise, who saith; When they shall sale unto 
you. Enquire of them that have a spirit of divination, and at the sooth- 
saiers, which whisper and mumble in your eares to deceive you, &c: 
enquire at your owne God, &c. And so let us doo. And here you 
see they are such as runne into corners, and cousen the people with 
lies, &c. For if they could doo as they sale, they could not aptlie be 
called liers, / neither need they go into corners to whisper, &c. 
103. 
Esai. 8, 19. 
139- 
The eight Chapter. 
Of the witch of Endor, and whether she accomplished the raising of 
Samuel truelie, or by deceipt : the opinio?i of sojne divines here- 
upon. 
I HE woman of Endor is comprised under this word Ob : 
for she is called Pythonissa. It is written in 2. Satn. cap. 
28. that she raised up Samuel from death, and the other 
words of the text are stronglie placed, to inforce his verie 
resurrection. The mind and opinion of Jesus Syrach evidentlie 
appeareth to be, that Samuel in person was raised out from his 
grave, as if you read Eccl. 46. 19, 20. you shall plainlie perceive. 
Howbeit he disputeth not there, whether the storie be true or false, 
but onlie citeth certaine verses of the i. booke of Samuel cap. 18. 
simplie, according to the letter, persuading maners and the imitation 
2. Sam. 28.

--- PAGE 210 ---
I I 2 
7. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Sap 3. 
Ps. 92. & 97. 
Ckrysost. ho- 
milia. 21. in 
Maith. 
Luke. 16. 
140. 
August, lib. 
quce. vet. et 104. 
novi testam. 
qucest. 27. 
Item, part. 2. 
cap. 26. 
Item, qute. 5. 
nec mi rum 
ad Simpli- 
cian. lib. 2. 93 
ad Dulciti- 
um. quie. 6. 
Item. lib. 2. 
de doct. chri. 
Deut. ifi, 
Exodus. 20. 
of our vertuous predecessors, and repeating the examples of diverse 
excellent men; namelie of vy^wz/^/ : even as the text it selfe urgeth 
the matter, according to the deceived mind and imagination of Saide, 
and his servants. And therefore in truth. Struck spake there accord- 
ing to the opinion o{ Saule, which so supposed, otherwise it is neither 
heresie nor treason to sale he was deceived. 
He that weigheth well that place, and looketh into it advisedlie, 
shall see that Samuel was not raised from the dead; but that it was an 
illusion or cousenage practised by the witch. For the soules of the 
righteous are in the hands of God: according to that which Chrysos- 
tome saith; Soules are in a certeine place expecting judgement, and 
cannot remove from thence. Neither is it Gods will, that the living 
should be taught by the dead. Which things are confirmed and 
approved by the example of Lazarus and Dives : where it appeareth 
according to Deut. 18. that he will not have the living taught by the 
dead, but will have us sticke to his word, wherein his will and testa- 
ment is declared. In deed / Lyra and Dionysius incline greatlie to the 
letter. And Lyra saith, that as when Balaam would have raised a divell, 
God interposed himselfe: so did he in this case bring up Samteell, 
when the witch would have raised hir divell. Which is a probable 
interpretation. But yet they dare not stand to that opinion, least they 
should impeach S. Atcgicstines credit, who (they confesse) remained in 
judgement and opinion (without contradiction of the church) / that 
Samuell was not raised. For he saith directlie, that himselfe 
was not called up. And indeed, if he were raised, it was either wil- 
linglie, or perforce: if it were willinglie, his sinne had beene equall 
with the witches. 
And Peter Martyr (me thinks) saith more to the purpose, in these 
words, to wit: This must have beene doone by Gods good will, or 
perforce of art magicke: it could not be doone by his good will, 
bicause he forbad it ; nor by art, bicause witches have no power over 
the godlie. Where it is answered by some, that the commandement 
was onlie to prohibit the Jewes to aske counsell of the dead, and so 
no fault in Samuell to give counsell. We may as well excuse our 
neighbours wife, for consenting to our filthie desires, bicause 
it is onlie written in the decalog ; Thou shalt not desire 
thy neighbours wife. But indeed was direct- 
lie forbidden to answer Saule before he died : 
and therefore it was not likelie that 
God would appoint him, when 
he was dead, to 
doo it.

--- PAGE 211 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 9. 
The ninth Chapter. 
That Saimiel -was not raised indeed, and how Bodin and nil 
papists dote herein^ and that soules cannot be raised by witch- 
craft. 
URTHERMORE, it is not likelie that God would answer 
Saule by dead Saimtell, when he would not answer him 
by living Sainuell : and most unlikelie of all, that God 
would answer him by a divell, that denied to doo it by a 
prophet. That he was not brought up perforce, the whole course of 
the scripture witnesseth, and/ prooveth ; as also our owne reason may 141. 
give us to understand. For what quiet rest could the soules of the 
elect enjoy or possesse in Abrahams bosome, if they were to be 
plucked from thence at a witches call and commandement ? But so 
should the divell have power in heaven, where he is unworthie to 
have anie place himselfe, and therefore unmeete to command others. 
Manie other of the fathers are flatlie against the raising up of 
Saimtell : namelie, Tertullian in his bookeZ'£^ anima,_/ustine Martyr 
In explicatione, qua. 25. Rabatitcs In epistolis ad Bonas. A bat, Origen 
In historia de Bileamo, Sr'c. Some other dote exceedinglie herein, 
as namelie Bodin, and all the papists in generall : also Rabbi Sedias 
Haias, & also all the Hebrues, saving R. David Kimhi, which is the 
best writer of all the Rabbins : though never a good of them all. But 
Bodin, in maintenance therof, falleth into manie absurdities, prooving j. Bod. lib. de 
by the small faults that Saule had committed, that he was an elect : ^' ^ 
for the greatest matter (saith he) laid unto his charge, is the reserving 
of the Ainalekits cattell, &c. He was an elect, &c : confiiming his i. Samu. 28. 
opinion with manie ridiculous fables, & with this argument, to wit : 
His fault was too little to deserve damnation ; for Paule would not i. Cor. 5. 
have the incestuous man punished too sore, that his soule might be j. Martyr in 
saved. Ttistine Martyr in another place was not onlie deceived in the coiloquw 
. . y , „ , , cum Tyif'hO' 
actuall raismg up of Samuels soule, but affirmed that all the soules of ne judceo. 
the prophets and just men are subject to the power of witches./ And 105. 
yet were the Heathen much more fond herein, who (as Lactantius Lad. Ub. 7. 
affirmeth) boasted that they could call up the soules of the dead, and 
yet did thinke that their soules died with their bodies. Whereby is 
to be scene, how alwaies the world hath beene abused in the matters 
of witchcraft & conjuration. The Necromancers affirme, that the 
spirit of anie man may be called up, or recalled (as they terme it) 
before one yeare be past after their departure from the bodie. Which 
C. Agrippa in his booke De occulta philosophia saith, may be doonc 
Q

--- PAGE 212 ---
114 7- Booke. 
The discoverie 
by cei teine naturall forces and bonds. And therefore corpses in times 
past were accompanied and watched with h'ghts, sprinkled with holie 
water, perfumed with incense, and purged with praier all the while 
they were above ground : otherwise the serpent (as the Maisters of 
the Hebrues sale) would devoure them, as the food appointed to him 
142. by God : Gen. 3. alled/ging also this place ; We shall not all sleepe, 
but we shall be changed, bicause manie shall remaine for perpetuall 
meate to the serpent : whereupon riseth the contention betweene him 
Jud, vers. 9. and Michaell, concerning the bodie of Moses ; wherein scripture is 
alledged. I confesse that Augustine, and the residue of the doctors, 
that denie the raising of Sainuell, conclude, that the divell was fetcht 
up in his likenesse : from whose opinions (with reverence) I hope I 
may dissent. 
The tenth Chapter. 
That neither the dii'ell nor Saimiell was raised, but that it was a 
7neere cousenage, according to the guise of our Pythonists. 
GAINE, if the divell appeared, and not Samuell : whie is 
it said in Eccle. that he slept.? for the divell neither 
sleepeth nor dieth. But in truth we may gather, that it 
was neither the divell in person, nor Samuell : but a 
circumstance is here described, according to the deceived opinion and 
imagination of Saule. Howbeit Augustine saith, that both these 
sides may easilie be defended. But we shall not need to fetch an 
exposition so farre off : for indeed (me thinkes) it is Longl petita ; 
nor to descend so lowe as hell, to fetch up a divell to expound this 
Pompanaci- place. For it is ridiculous (as Pompanacius saith) to leave manifest 
eant. cap. 2. things, and such as by naturall reason may be prooved, to seeke 
unknowne things, which by no likeliehood can be conceived, nor tried 
by anie rule of reason. But in so much as we have libertie by S. 
Augustines rule, in such places of scripture as seeme to conteine 
either contrarietie or absurditie, to varie from the letter, and to make 
a godlie construction agreeable to the word ; let us confesse that 
Sajnuell was not raised (for that were repugnant to the word) and see 
whether this illusion may not be contrived by the art and cunning of 
the woman, without anie of these supernaturall devices : for I could 
J4J. cite a hundred papisticall and cousening practises, as/ difficult as this, 
and as cleanlie handled. And it is to be surelie thought, if it had 
beene a divell, the text would have noted it in some place of the storie: 
as it dooth not. But Bodin helpeth me exceedinglie in this point, 
106. wherein he for/saketh (he saith) Augustine, TertuUian, and D. Kimhi

--- PAGE 213 ---
of Witchcraft. Chap. II. I I 
himselfe, who saie it was the divell that was raised up : which (saith j. Bod. Ub. de 
Bodin) could not be ; for that in the same communication betweene ^' 
Sanle and Samuell, the name of Jehovah is five times repeated, of 
which name the divell cannot abide the hearing. 
The eleventh Chapter. 
The objection of the witchniongers concerning this place fullie 
answered, and what circumstances are to be considered for the 
under statiding of this storie, which is plainelie opened from the 
beginning of the 28. chap, of the i. Saimiel, to the 12. verse. 
HERE such a supernaturall miracle is wrought, no doubt p. Martyr 
it is a testimonie of truth ; as Peter Martyr affirmeth. '^SaniU'i.' 
And in this case it should have beene a witnesse of lies : 9. 
for (saith he) a matter of such weight cannot be attributed 
unto the divell, but it is the mightie power of God that dooth accom- 
plish it. And if it laie in a witches power to call up a divell, yet it 
lieth not in a witches power to worke such miracles : for (}od will not l^a^- 42- ^ 
give his power and glorie to anie creature. To understand this place, 
we must diligentlie examine the circumstance thereof. It was well 
knowne that Saule, before he resorted to the witch, was in despaire of 
the mercies and goodnes of God ; partlie for that Samuell told him 
long before, that he should be overthrowne, and David should have 
his place ; and partlie bicause God before had refused to answer him, 
either by Samuell when he lived, or by anie other prophet, or by 
Urim or Thumim, &c. And if you desire to see this matter dis- 
cussed, turne to the first of Samuell, the 28. chapter, and conferre my 
words therewith./ 
Saule seeing the host of the Philistines come upon him (which thing 144. 
could not be unknown to all the people) fainted, bicause he sawe 
their strength, and his owne weaknesse, and speciallie that he was 
forsaken : so as being now straught of mind, desperate, and a verie 
foole, he goeth to certeine of his servants, that sawe in what taking i. Sam. 2%, 7. 
he was, and asked them for a woman that had a familiar spirit, and 
they told him by and by that there dwelt one at Endor. By the waie 
you shall understand, that both Saule and his servants ment such a one 
as could by hir spirit raise up Samuell, or any other that was dead and 
buried. Wherein you see they were deceived, though it were true, that 
she tooke upon hir so to doo. To what use then served hir familiar 
spirit, which you conceive she had, bicause Saules servants said so .'' 
Surelie, as they were deceived and abused in part, so doubtlesse were ^ ^. 
they in the rest. For to