s fables, 
as lieng vanities : whereof you may find in the golden legend, M. Mai. 
and speciallie in Bodin miraculous stuffe, enough to checke all the 
miracles expressed in the old and new testament ; which are of more 
credit with manie bewitched people, than the true miracles of 
Christ himselfe. Insomuch as they stand in more awe 
of the manacies of a witch, than of all the 
threatnings and cursses pronounced 
by God, and expressed in his 
word. And thus much 
touching the word 
JCasam.j /

--- PAGE 241 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 2. ] 43 
130. 
Ecclus. 24. 
Jerem. 27. 
Eccle. 5. 
7)^^ tenth Booke. m- 
The first Chapter. 
The interpretation of this Hebrne word Onen, of the vanitie of 
dreatnes, and divinations thereupon. 
|iNEN differeth not much from but that it is extended 
to the interpretation of dreames. And as for dreames, what- 
soever credit is attributed unto them, proceedeth of follie: 
and they are fooles that trust in them, for whie they have 
deceived many. In which respect the Prophet giveth us good warn- 
ing, not to followe nor hearken to the expositors of dreames, for they 
come through the multitude of busines. And therefore those witches, 
that make men beleeve they can prophesie upon dreames, as knowing 
the interpretation of them, and either for monie or glorie abuse men 
& women therby, are meere couseners, and worthie of great punish- 
ment : as are such witchmongers, as beleeving them, attribute unto 
them such divine power as onelie belongeth to God : as appeereth in 
Jeremie the Prophet./ 
The second Chapter. 
Of divine., natural!, and casuall dreajnes, with their differing 
causes and effects. 
ACROBIUS recounteth five differences of images, or 
rather imaginations exhibited unto them that sleepe, 
which for the most part doo signifie somewhat in admo- 
nition. There be also many subdivisions made hereof, 
which I thinke needlesse to reherse. In fasper Peucer they are to be Peucerin 
seene, with the causes and occasions of dreames. There were woont somniis. 
to be delivered from God himselfe or his angels, certeine dreames 
and visions unto the prophets and holie fathers : according to the 
saieng of foel ; I will powre my spirit upon all flesh, your yoong men joei. 2. 
shall dreame dreames, and your old men shall see visions. These 
kind of dreames (I say) were the admonishments and forewarnings Matth. i. 20. 
of God to his people : as that of foseph, to abide with Marie his wife, 
after she was conceived by the Holie-ghost, as also to conveie our Matth. 2, 13. 
Saviour Christ into Aegypt, &c : the interpretation whereof are the 
peculiar gifts of God, which Joseph the patriarch, and Daniel the Gen, 39. & 
prophet had most speciallie. 
As forphysicall conjectures upon dreames, the scriptures *improove [*?reproove] 
Jerem. 23. 
25. 26. 27. 
Read the 
words. 
178.

--- PAGE 242 ---
144 '°' ^^^^ disc over ie 
them not : for by them the physicians mania times doo understand 
the state of their patients bodies. For some of them come by meanes 
of choler, flegme, melanchohe, or bloud ; and some by love, surfet, 
hunger, thirst, &c. Galloi and Boetius were said to deale with 
131. divels, bicause they/ told so justlie their patients dreames, or rather 
by their dreames their speciall diseases. Howbeit, physicall dreames 
are naturall, and the cause of them dwelleth in the nature of man. 
For they are the inward actions of the mind in the spirits of the 
braine, whilest the bodie is occupied with sleepe : for as touching 
the mind it selfe, it never sleepeth. These dreames varie, according 
to the difference of humors and vapors. There are also casuall 
Eccles. 5. lyg. dreames, which (as Salomon saith)/ come through the multitude of 
businesse. For as a looking glasse sheweth the image or figure there- 
unto opposite : so in dreames, the phantasie & imagination informes 
the understanding of such things as haunt the outward sense. 
Whereupon the poet saith : 
Sovinia ne cures, nam mens hmnana qnod optat, 
Dton vigilat sperans,per somnum cerfiit id ipsum : 
Regard no dreames, for why the mind 
Of that ifi sleepe a view dooth take, 
Which it dooth wish and hope to find, 
At such time as it is awake. 
Abraham 
Firming. 
A dissonan- 
cie in opi- 
nions a- 
bout 
dreames. 
The third Chapter. 
The opinion of divers old writers touching dreames, and how they 
varie in noting the causes thereof. 
|YNESIUS, Theniistius, Democritus,2MA others grounding 
themselves upon examples that chance hath sometimes 
verified, persuade men, that nothing is dreamed in vaine : 
affirming that the hevenlie influencies doo bring foorth 
divers formes in corporall matters ; and of the same influencies, visions 
and dreames are printed in the fantasticall power, which is instru- 
mentall, with a celestiall disposition meete to bring foorth some effect, 
especiallie in sleepe, when the mind (being free from bodilie cares) may 
more liberallie receive the heavenlie influencies, wherby many things 
are knowne to them sleeping in dreames, which they that wake cannot 
see. Plato attributeth them to the formes and ingendred knowledges 
of the soule ; Avicen to the last intelligence that moveth the moone, 
through the light that lighteneth the fantasie in sleepe ; Aristotle to 
the phantasticall sense ; Averroes to the imaginative ; Albert to the 
influence of superior bodies. '/

--- PAGE 243 ---
of Witchcraft, 
Chap. 4. 
The fourth Chapter. 
Against mterpretors of dreames, of the or dinar ie cause of drcaines, 
Hemingius his opinion of diabolical! dreames, the interpretation 
of dreames ceased. 
[here are bookes carried about concerning this matter, 
under the name of Abraham, who (as Philo In lib. gigan- 
tum saith) was the first inventor of the exposition of 
^^^^^^^^^ dreames : and so Hkewise of Salojnon and Daniel. But 
Cicero In lib. de divinatione confuteth the vanitie and folHe of them 
that give credit to dreames. And as for the interpreters of dreames, 
as they knowe not before the dreame, nor yet after, any certeintie ; 
yet when any thing afterwards happeneth, then they appHe the dreame 
to that which hath chanced. 
Certeinhe men never HghtHe faile to dreame by night, of that which 
they meditate by daie : and by daie they see divers and sundrie 
things, and conceive them severaUie in their minds. Then those 
mixed conceits being laid up in the closset of the memorie, strive 
togither ; which, bicause the phantasie cannot discerne nor discusse, 
some certeine thing gathered of manie conceits is bred and contrived 
in one togither. And therefore in mine opinion, it is time vainelie 
emploied, to studie about the interpretation of dreames. He that list 
to see the folUe and vanitie thereof, maie read, a vaine treatise, set 
out by Thomas Hill Londoner, 1568. 
Lastlie, there are diabolicall dreames, which Nicolaus Hemingius 
divideth into three sortes. The first is, when the divell immediathe 
of himselfe (he meaneth corporalhe) ofifereth anie matter of dreame. 
Secondhe, when the divell sheweth revelations to them that have 
made request unto him therefore. Thirdlie, when magicians by art 
bring to passe, that other men dreame what they will. Assuredlie 
these, and so all the rest (as they maie be used) are verie magicall 
and divelish dreames. For although we maie receive comfort of 
mind by those, which are called divine/ dreames, and health of bodie 
through physicall dreames : yet if we take upon us to use the office of 
God in the revelation or rather the interpretation of them ; or if we 
attribute unto them miraculous effects (now when we see the gifts of 
prophesie, and of interpretation of dreames, and also the operation of 
miracles are ceased, which were speciall and peculiar gifts of God, to 
confirme the truth of the word, and to establish his people in the faith 
of the Messias, who is now exhibited unto us both in the testament, 
and also in the bloud of our Saviour Jesus Christ) we are bewitched, 
U 
180. 133. 
The plea- 
sant art of 
the inter- 
pretation 
of dreames. 
N. Hemin. iji 
admonitio- 
iiib. de super- 
stitionib. ma- 
gifi's vitadis. 
181. 
The end & 
use of pro- 
phesie, in- 
terpretatic) 
of dreames, 
operation 
of mira- 
cles, &c.

--- PAGE 244 ---
1 46 10 Booke. The discoverie 
and both abuse and offend the majestic of God, and also seduce, 
delude and cousen all such as by our persuasion, and their owne 
light beleefe, give us credit. / 
133. The fift Chapter. 
That neither witches, nor anie other, can either by words or hearbs, 
thrust into the mind of a sleepin_^ 7nan, what cogitations or 
dreaines they list j and whence magicall dreames come. 
Seeks for 
such stuffe 
in my booke 
of Hartu- 
mim. 
Dan. 2. 
Gen. II, 8. 
Gen. 37, & 
1 1. 
Isai, II. 
Dan. 2. 
Aristot. di 
somnio. 
GRANT there male be hearbs and stones found and 
knowne to the physicians, which male procure dreames ; 
and other hearbs and stones, &c : to make one bewraie 
all the secrets of his mind, when his bodie sleepeth, or at 
least wise to procure speech in sleepe. But that witches or magicians 
have power by words, herbs, or imprecations to thrust into the mind 
or conscience of man, what it shall please them, by vertue of their 
charmes, hearbs, stones, or familiars, &c : according to the opinion 
of Hemiiigius, I denie : though therewithal! I confesse, that the 
divell both by daie and also by night, travelleth to seduce man, and 
to lead him from God ; yea and that no waie more than this, where 
he placeth himselfe as God in the minds of them that are so cre- 
dulous, to attribute unto him, or unto witches, that which is onlie in 
the office, nature, and power of God to accomplish. 
Doth not Daniel the prophet saie, even in this case ; It is the/ 
182. Lord onelie that knoweth such secrets, as in the exposition of dreames 
is required ? And doth not Joseph repeat those verie words to Pharaos 
officers, who consulted with him therein Examples of divine 
dreames you maie find a great number in the scripture, such (I 
meane) as it pleased God to reveale his pleasure by. Of physicall 
dreames we maie both read in authors, and see in our owne experi- 
ence dailie, or rather nightly. Such dreams also as are casuall, they 
are likewise usuall, and come (as hath beene said) through the multi- 
tude of affaires and businesse. Those which in these dales are ' 
called magicall or diabolicall dreames, maie rather be called melan- 
cholicall. For out of that blacke vapor in sleepe, through dreames, 
appeareth (as Aristotle saith) some horrible thing ; and as it were the 
image of an ouglie divell : sometimes also other terrible visions, 
imaginations, counsels, and practises. As where we read of a cer- 
teine man, that dreamed there appeared one unto him that required 
him to throwe himselfe into a deepe pit, and that he should reape 
great benefit thereby at Gods hands. So as the miserable wretch 
giving credit thereunto, performed the matter, and killed himselfe.

--- PAGE 245 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. y- 147 
Now I confesse, that the interpretation or execution of that dreame 
was indeed diabolicall : but the dreame was casuall, derived from the 
heavie and blacke humor of melancholic./ 
The sixt Chapter. 134. 
How men have beene bewitched, consened or abused by dreames to dig 
and search for ?nonie. 
I OW manie have beene bewitched with dreames, and thereby Such would 
made to consume themselves with digging and searching ked™n''?he 
formonie, &c : whereof they, or some other have drempt? ship of 
■ /- I • 1 ■ fooles. 
I my selfe could manifest, as havmg knowne how wise 
men have beene that waie abused by verie simple persons, even where 
no dreame hath beene met withall, but waking dreames. And this hath 
beene used heretofore, as one of the finest cousening feates : in so much/ 
as there is a verie formall art thereof devised, with manie excellent 
superstitions and ceremonies thereunto belonging, which I will set 
downe as breeflie as maie be. Albeit that here in Engla7td, this 
proverbe hath beene current ; to wit, Dreames proove contrarie : 
according to the answer of the priests boy to his master, who told his 
said boy that he drempt he kissed his taile : Yea maister (saith he) 
but dreames proove contrarie, you must kisse mine. 
183. 
An english 
proverbe. 
The seventh Chapter. 
The art and order to be used in digging for monie, revealed by 
dreames, how to procure pleasant dreames, of morning and mid- 
night dreames. 
HERE must be made upon a hazell wand three crosses. Note this 
superstiti- 
ous do- 
tage. 
and certeine words both blasphemous and impious must 
be said over it, and hereunto must be added certeine 
characters, & barbarous names. And whilest the trea- 
a digging, there must be read the psalmes, De profitndis, 
sure is 
Missa, Misereatur nostri, Reqiiiem, Pater noster, Ave Maria, Et tie 
nos inducas iti feniatioftem, sed libera nos d inalo, Amen. A porta 
inferi credo videre bona, &^c. Expectate Dominuin, Requiem ceternam. 
And then a certeine praier. And if the time of digging be neglected, 
the divell will carie all the treasure awaie. See other more absolute 
conjurations for this purpose, in the word lidoni following. 
You shall find in fohannes Baptista Neapolitattus, diverse receipts '\n^nat3li^' 
by hearbes and potions, to procure pleasant or fearefull dreames ; and mag. m. 2. 
perfumes also to that effect : who affirmeth, that dreames in the dead of 84." '

--- PAGE 246 ---
1 48 10. Booke. The discoverie 
the night are commonhe preposterous and monstrous; and in the morn- 
ing when the grosse humors be spent, there happen more pleasant and 
certeine dreames, the bloud being more pure than at other times : 
the reason whereof is there expressed.// 
Confecti- 
ons or re- 
ceipts for 
the mira- 
culous 
transpor- 
tation of 
witches. 
135.. The eight Chapter. 
Stmdrie receipts and ointments, jnade mid used for the transporta- 
tion of witches, and other miraculous effects : an instance therof 
reported and credited by some that are learned. 
T shall not be amisse here in this place to repeate an 
ointment greatlie to this purpose, rehearsed by the fore- 
said John Bapt. Neap, wherein although he maie be 
overtaken and cousened by an old witch, and made not 
onelie to beleeve, but also to report a false tale ; yet bicause it 
greatlie overthroweth the opinion of M. Mai. Bodin, and such other, 
as write so absolutelie in maintenance of witches transportations, I 
will set downe his words in this behalfe. The receipt is as followeth. 
R. The fat of yoong children, and seeth it with water in a brasen 
vessell, reserving the thickest of that which remaineth boiled in the 
bottome, which they laie up and keepe, untill occasion serveth to use 
it. They put hereunto Eleoselinum, Aconitum, Frondes populeas, and 
Soote. 
Another receipt to the same purpose. 
R. Slum, acaruvi vulgare, pentaphyllon, the bloud of a flitter- 
mouse, solanum somniferum., Sr' oleum. They stampe all these 
togither, and then they rubbe all parts of their bodies exceedinglie, 
till they looke red, and be verie hot, so as the pores may be opened, 
and their flesh soluble and loose. They joine herewithall either fat, 
or oile in steed thereof, that the force of the ointment maie the rather 
pearse inwardly, and so be more effectuall. By this means (saith he) 
in a moone light night they seeme to be carried in the aire, to feast- 
ing, singing, dansing, kissing, culling, and other acts of venerie, with 
such youthes as they love and desire most : for the force (saith he) ot 
their imagination is so vehement, that almost all that part of the 
braine, wherein the memorie consisteth, is full of such conceipts. 
18^. And whereas they are naturallie prone/ to beleeve anie thing ; so doo 
they receive such impressions and stedfast imaginations into their 
minds, as even their spirits are altered thereby ; not thinking upon 
anie thing else, either by dale or by night. And this helpeth them 
forward in their imaginations, that their usuall food is none other 
commonlie but beets, rootes, nuts, beanes, pcaze,

--- PAGE 247 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 9. I 49 
Now (saith he) when I considered throughlie hereof, remaining VetuU, quas 
doubtfull of the matter, there fell into my hands a witch, who of hir ^fJaine"st^t 
owne accord did promise me to fetch me an errand out of hand from ges vacant, 
farre countries, and willed all them, whome I had brought to witnesse V'^miorum 
the matter, to depart out of the chamber. And when she had J^"f""^^^„l' 
undressed hir selfe, and froted hir bodie with certeine ointments tiutn exsor- 
(which action we beheld through a chinke or little hole of the doore) 
she fell downe thorough the force of those soporiferous or sleepie oint- 
ments into a most sound and heavie sleepe : so as we did breake 
open the doore, and did beate hir exceedinglie ; but/ the force of hir 136. 
sleepe was such, as it tooke awaie from hir the sense of feeling : and 
we departed for a time. Now when hir strength and powers were 
wearie and decaied, shee awooke of hir owne accord, and began to 
speake manie vaine and doting words, affirming that she had passed 
over both seas and mountaines ; delivering to us manie untrue and 
false reports : we earnestlie denied them, she impudentlie affirmed 
them. This (saith he) will not so come to passe with everie one, but 
onlie with old women that are melancholike, whose nature is extreame 
cold, and their evaporation small ; and they both perceive and 
remember what they see in that case and taking of theirs. 
The ninth Chapter. 
A confutation of the former follies, as well concerning ointments, 
dreames, S^c. as also of the asseniblie of witches, and of their con- 
sultations and bankets at sundrie places, and all in dreames. 
iUT if it be true that S. Augustine saith, and manie other 
writers, that witches nightwalkings are but phantasies 
and dreames : then all the reportes of their bargaine, 
transporting, and mee/tings with Diana, Minerva, &c : 
are but fables ; and then do they lie that mainteine those actions to 
be doone in deed and veritie, which in truth are doone no waie. It 
were marvell on the one side (if those things happened in dreames, 
which neverthelesse the witches affirme to be otherwise) that when 
those witches awake, they neither consider nor remember that they 
were in a dreame. It were marvell that their ointments, by the 
physicians opinions having no force at all to that effect, as they con- 
fesse which are inquisitors, should have such operation. It were 
marvell that their ointments cannot be found anie where, saving onelie 
in the inquisitors bookes. It were marvell, that when a stranger is 
annointed therewith, they have sometimes, and yet not alwaies, the 
like operation as with witches ; which all the inquisitors confesse. 
186. 
Bart hoi. Sfi- 
ncEus, q. de 
strigib. c. 31.

--- PAGE 248 ---
10. Bookc. 
The discoverie 
Bar. Sfin. qu. 
de strigib. c, 
30- 
New mat- 
ter & wor- 
ihie to be 
marvelled 
at. 
137. 
187. 
Legend, aur. 
in vita S. 
Germani. 
But to this last, frier BartholonKzus saith, that the witches them- 
selves, before they annoint themselves, do heare in the night time a 
great noise of minstrels, which flie over them, with the ladie of the 
fairies, and then they addresse themselves to their journie. But then 
I marvell againe, that no bodie else heareth nor seeth this troope of 
minstrels, especiallie riding in a moone light night. It is marvell 
that they that thinke this to be but in a dreame, can be persuaded 
that all the rest is anie other than dreames. It is marvell that in 
dreames, witches of old acquaintance meet so just togither, and con- 
clude upon murthers, and receive ointments, roots, powders, &c : (as 
witchmongers report they doo, and as they make the witches confesse) 
and yet lie at home fast asleepe. It is marvell that such preparation 
is made for them (as Sprenger, Bartholomew., and Bodin report) as 
well in noble mens houses, as in alehouses ; and that they come in 
dreames, and eate up their meate : and the alewife speciallie is not 
wearied with them for non paiment of their score,/ or false paiment ; 
to wit, with imaginarie monie, which they saie is not substantiall, and 
that they talke not afterwards about the reckoning, and so discover 
the matter. And it is most marvell of all, that the hostesse, &c: dooth 
not sit among them, and take part of their good cheere. For so it is, 
that if any part of these their meetings and league be true, it is as 
true and as certeinlie prooved and confessed, that at some alehouse, 
or sometime at some Gen/tlemans house, there is continuall pre- 
paration made monethlie for this assemblie : as appeereth in S. 
Germans storie. 
I. Re. 3, 5. 15. 
I. Reg. 9. 
The tenth Chapter. 
That most part of prophesies in the old testament were revealed in 
dreames, that we are not now to looke for such revelations, of 
sofne who have drempt of that which hath come to passe, that 
dreames proove contrarie, Nabuchadnez-zars rule to knowe a trzie 
expositor of dreames. 
It is held and mainteined by divers, and gathered out of 
the 12. of Numbers, that all which was written or spoken 
by the prophets, among the children of Israel {Moses ex- 
cepted) was propounded to them by dreames. And indeed 
it is manifest, that manie things, which are thought by the unlearned 
to have beene reallie finished, have beene onlie performed by dreams 
and visions. As where Salomon required of God the gift of wis- 
dome : that was (I say) in a dreame ; and also where he received 
promise of the continuance of the kingdome of Israel in his line. So

--- PAGE 249 ---
of WitcJuraft. 
Chap. 10. 
was Esais vision in the 6. of his prophesie : as also that of Ezechiel 
the 12. Finallie, where Jeremie was commanded to hide his girdle in 
the clift of a rocke at the river Euphrates in Babylon ; and that after 
certeine dales, it did there putrifie, it must needs be in a dreame ; for 
Jeretnie was never (or at leastwise not then) at Babylon. We that are 
christians must not now slumber and dreame, but watch and praie, 
and meditate upon our salvation in Christ both dale and night. And 
if we expect revelations in our dreames, now, when Christ is come, 
we shall deceive our selves : for in him are fulfilled all dreames and 
prophesies. Howbeit, Bodhi holdeth that dreames and visions con- 
tinue till this dale, in as miraculous maner as ever they did. 
If you read Arie!nido?'us, you shall read manie stories of such as 
drempt of things that afterwards cam to passe. But he might have 
cited a thousand for one that fell out contrarie : for as for / such 
dreamers among the Jews themselves, as had not extraordinarie 
visions miraculouslie exhibited unto them by God, they were counted 
couseners, as may appeere by these words of the prophet Zacharie ; 
Surelie the idols have spoken vanitie, and the soothsaiers have scene 
a lie, and the dreamers have told a vaine thing. According to 
Salomons saieng ; In the multitude of dreames and vanities are 
manie words. It appeereth in Jeremie 23. that the false prophets, 
whilest they illuded the people with lies, counterfetting the true 
prophets, used to crie out ; Dreames, dreames ; We have dreamed a 
dreame, &c. Finallie, Nabuchadjiez-zar teacheth all men to knowe a 
true expositor of dreames ; to wit, such a one as hath his 
revelation from GOD. For he can (as Daniel did) 
repeate your dreame before you discover it : 
which thing if anie expounder of 
dreames can doo at 
this daie, I will 
beleeve 
him.// 
Isai. 6. 
Ezech. I J. 
Jerem. 13. 
J. Bodin. 
lib. de dx- 
vion. I. cap. 5. 
188. 
Zach. 10, 2. 
Eccles. 5, 6. 
Jerem. 23. 
Daniel. J.

