and the rather (as I suppose) bicause the 
said C. Agrippa recanted that which Bodi7t mainteineth, who thinketh 
he could worke wonders by magicke, and speciallieby his blacke dog. 
It should seeme he / had prettie skill in the art of divination. For 
though he wrote before Bodin manie a yeare, yet uttereth he these 
words in his booke De vanitate scientiarum : A certeine French 
protonotarie (saith he) a lewd fellow and a coosener, hath written 
a certeine fable or miracle done at Lions, Gr'c. What 
Bodin is, I knowe not, otherwise than by report ; but 
I am certeine this his tale is a fond fable : and 
Bodin saith it was performed at Lions ; 
and this man (as I under- 
stand) by profession 
is a civill 
lawier.

--- PAGE 135 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 6. 
37 
The sixt Chapter. 
A disproof e of their assemblies, and of their bargaine. 
HAT the joining of hands with the divell, the kissing 
of his bare buttocl<s, and his scratching and biting 
of them, are absurd hes ; everie one having the gift 
of reason may plainlie perceive : in so much as it 
is manifest unto us by the word of God, that a spirit hath no 
flesh, bones, nor sinewes, whereof hands, buttoclts, claws, teeth, 
and lips doo consist. For admit that the constitution of a divels 
bodie (as Tatian and other afifirme) consisteth in spirituall / congela- 
tions, as of fier and aire ; yet it cannot be perceived of mortall 
creatures. What credible witnesse is there brought at anie time, of 
this their corporall, visible, and incredible bargaine ; saving the con- 
fession of some person diseased both in bodie and mind, wilfullie 
made, or injuriouslie constrained } It is mervell that no penitent 
witch that forsaketh hir trade, confesseth not these things without 
compulsion. Mee thinketh their covenant made at baptisme with 
God, before good witnesses, sanctified with the word, confirmed with 
his promises, and established with his sacraments, should be of more 
force than that which they make with the divell, which no bodie 
seeth or knoweth. For God deceiveth none, with whom he bargaineth ; 
neither dooth he mocke or disappoint them, although he danse not 
among them. 
Their oth, to procure into their league and fellowship as manie as 
they can (whereby everie one witch, as Bodin affirmeth, augmenteth 
the number of fiftie) bewraieth greatlie their indirect deahng. 
Hereof I have made triall, as also of the residue of their coosening 
devices ; and have beene with the best, or rather the woorst of them, 
to see what might be gathered out of their counsels ; and have 
cunninglie treated with them thereabouts : and further, have sent 
certeine old persons to indent with them, to be admitted into their 
societie. But as well by their excuses and delaies, as by other 
circumstances, I have tried and found all their trade to be meere 
coosening. 
I praie you what bargaine have they made with the divell, that 
with their angrie lookes beewitch lambs, children, &c ? Is it not 
confessed, that it is naturall, though it be a lie.' What bargaine 
maketh the soothsaier, which hath his severall kinds of witchcraft 
and divination expressed in the scripture .'' Or is it not granted that 
they make none? How chanceth it that we heare not of this bargaine 
in the scriptures.''/ 
Tatianus 4-'- 
contra Gracos. 
The author 
speaketh 
upon due 
proofe and 
triall.

--- PAGE 136 ---
38 
3- Booke. 
The discoverie 
49- 41. 
Confession 
compulsorie : 
as by Hispani- 
call inquisition : 
Looke Mai. 
male/. &' Jo. 
Bodin. 
Confession 
persuasorie ; as 
by fiatterie : 
Looke Bry. 
Darcie against 
Ursu. Kemfe. 
John. Bod. 
Mai. Male/. 
L. absent, de 
foenis. 
L. 2. cum glos. 
de its. qui ante 
sentent. mor- 
tui sunt, sibi 
necem con- 
sciscentes. 
The seventh Chapter. 
A confutation of the objection concerning witches confessions. 
iT is confessed (saie some by the waie of objection) 
even of these women themselves, that they doo these 
and such other horrible things, as deserveth death, 
with all extremitie, &c. Whereunto I answer, that 
whosoever consideratelie beholdeth their confessions, shall perceive 
all to be vaine, idle, false, inconstant, and of no weight; except their 
contempt and ignorance in religion : which is rather the fault of the 
negligent pastor, than of the simple woman. 
First, if their confession be made by compulsion, of force or 
authoritie, or by persuasion, and under colour of freendship, it is not 
to be regarded ; bicause the extremitie of threts and tortures pro- 
vokes it ; or the qualitie of faire words and allurements constraines it. 
If it be voluntarie, manie circumstances must be considered, to wit ; 
whether she appeach not hir selfe to overthrow hir neighbour, which 
manie times happeneth through their cankered and malicious melan- 
cholike humor : then ; whether in that same melancholike mood 
and frentike humor, she desire not the abridgment of hir owne dales. 
Which thing Aristotle saith dooth oftentimes happen unto persons 
subject to melancholike passions : and (as Bodin and Sprejiger saie) 
to these old women called witches, which manie times (as they 
affirme) refuse to live ; thretning the judges, that if they may not be 
burned, they will laie hands upon themselves, and so make them 
guiltie of their damnation. 
I my selfe have knowne, that where such a one could not prevaile, 
to be accepted as a sufficient witnesse against himselfe, he presentlie 
went and threw himselfe into a pond of water, where he was drowned. 
But the lawe saith ; Volenti mori no7i est habenda fides, that is ; 
His word is not to be credited that is desirous to/ die. Also some- 
times (as else-where I have prooved) they confesse that whereof they 
were never guiltie ; supposing that they did that which they did not, 
by meanes of certeine circumstances. And as they sometimes con- 
fesse impossibilities, as that they flie in the aire, transubstantiate 
themselves, raise tempests, transfer or remoove corne, &c : so doo 
they also (I saie) confesse voluntarilie, that which no man could 
proove, and that which no man would ghesse, nor yet beleeve, except 
he were as mad as they ; so as they bring death wilfullie upon them- 
selves : which argueth an unsound mind. 
If they confesse that, which hath beene indeed committed by them,

--- PAGE 137 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 7. 
39 
as poisoning, or anie other kind of murther, which falleth into the 
power of such persons to accomplish ; I stand not to defend their 
cause. Howbeit, I would wish that even in that case there be not too 
rash credit given, nor too hastie proceedings used against them: but 
that the causes, properties, and circumstances of everie thing be dulie 
considered, and diligentlie examined. For you shall understand, that 
as sometimes they confesse they have murthered their neighbours with 
a wish, sometimes with a word, sometimes with a looke, &c: so they 
confesse, that with/ the delivering of an apple, or some such thing, to 
a woman with child, they have killed the child in the mothers wombe, 
when nothing was added thereunto, which naturallie could be noisome 
or hurtfull. 
In like maner they confesse, that with a touch of their bare hand, 
they sometimes kill a man being in perfect health and strength of 
bodie ; when all his garments are betwixt their hand and his flesh. 
But if this their confession be examined by divinitie, philosophic, 
physicke, lawe or conscience, it will be found false and insufficient. 
First, for that the working of miracles is ceased. Secondlie, no 
reason can be yeelded for a thing so farre beyond all reason. Third- 
lie, no receipt can be of such efficacie, as when the same is touched 
with a bare hand, from whence the veines have passage through the 
bodie unto the hart, it should not annoie the poisoner ; and yet reteine 
vertue and force enough, to pearse through so manie garments and 
the verie flesh incurablie, to the place of death in another person. 
Ctci ar^umento (saith Bodin) nescio qttid / 7'esponderi possU. Fourth- 
lie, no lawe will admit such a confession, as yeeldeth unto im- 
possibilities, against the which there is never any lawe provided ; 
otherwise it would not serve a mans turne, to plead and proove that 
he was at Berwicke that dale, that he is accused to have doone a 
murther in Canturburie ; for it might be said he was conveied to 
Berwicke, and backe againe by inchantment. Fiftlie, he is not by con- 
science to be executed, which hath no sound mind nor 
perfect judgement. And yet forsooth we read, that 
one mother Stile did kill one Saddocke with a touch 
on the shoulder, for not keeping promise with 
hir for an old cloake, to make hir a 
safegard ; and that she was 
hanged for hir 
labour. 
Absurdities 
in witches 
confessions. 
42, 
J. Bod. de rj 
dismon. lib, 
2. cap. 8. 
In a little pam- 
phlet of the 
acts and hang- 
ing of foure 
witches, in 
anno. 1579.

--- PAGE 138 ---
40 
3. Booke. 
The discoverie 
John Bod. 5^- 
43. 
Z. si per erro- 
rem jtirisd, 
omni cum 
inde. 
C. sed hoc d. 
de publ. (ic. 
Bal. in leg. 
The eight Chapter. 
IVhat follie it were for witches to eitter into such desperate peril!, 
and to endure such intollerable tortures for no gaine or commodi- 
ties and how it cojnes to passe that witches are overthrowne by 
their confessions. 
LAS ! if they were so subtill, as witchmongers make 
them to be, they would espie that it were meere follie 
for them, not onelie to make a bargaine with the 
 divell to throw their soules into hell fire, but their 
bodies to the tortures of temporall fire and death, for the accom- 
plishment of nothing that might benefit themselves at all : but 
they would at the leastwise indent with the divell, both to inrich 
them, and also to enoble them ; and finallie to endue them with all 
worldlie felicitie and pleasure : which is furthest from them of all 
other. Yea, if they were sensible, they would saie to the divell ; Whie 
should I hearken to you, when you will deceive me ? Did you not 
promise my neighbour mother Button to save and rescue hir ; and yet 
lo she is hanged 
Surelie this would appose the divell verie sore. 
And it is a woonder, that none, from the beginning of the world, till 
this dale, hath made this and such like objections, whereto the divell 
could never / make answer. But were it not more madnes for them 
to serve the divell, under these conditions ; and yet to endure/ 
whippings with iron rods at the divels hands ; which (as the witch- 
mongers write) are so set on, that the print of the lashes remaine 
upon the witches bodie ever after, even so long as she hath a dale 
to live 
But these old women being daunted with authoritie, circumvented 
with guile, constrained by force, compelled by feare, induced by error, 
and deceived by ignorance, doo fall into such rash credulitie, and so 
are brought unto these absurd confessions. Whose error of mind and 
blindnes of will dependeth upon the disease and infirmitie of nature : 
and therefore their actions in that case are the more to be borne 
withall ; bicause they, being destitute of reason, can have no consent. 
For, Delictum sine consensu non potest committi, neque injuria 
sine atiimo injuriandi ; that is. There can be no sinne without 
consent, nor injurie committed without a mind to doo wrong. 
Yet the lawe saith further, that A purpose reteined in mind, dooth 
nothing to the privat or publike hurt of anie man ; and much more 
that an impossible purpose is unpunishable. SancB mentis voluntas, 
voluntas rei possibilis est ; A sound mind willeth nothing but that 
which is possible.

--- PAGE 139 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 9. I 
The ninth Chapter. 
How melanckolie abuseik old women, and of the effects thereof by 
sundrie examples. 
F anie man advisedlie marke their words, actions, cogi- 
tations, and gestures, he shall perceive that melancholie 
abounding in their head, and occupieng their braine, hath 
deprived or rather depraved their judgements, and all their 
senses: I meane not of coosening witches, but of poore melancholike 
women, which are themselves deceived. For you shall understand, that 
the force which melancholie hath, and the effects that it worketh in the 
bodie of a man, or rather of a woman, are almost incredible. For as 
some of these melancholike persons imagine, they are witches/ and by 53- 
witchcraft can worke woonders, and doo what they list : so doo other, 
troubled with this disease, imagine manie strange, incredible, and im- 
possible things. Some, that they are monarchs and princes, and that all 
other men are their subjects : some, that they are brute beasts : some, 
that they be urinals or earthen pots, greatlie fearing to be broken : some, 
that everie one that meeteth them, will conveie them to the gallowes ; 
and yet in the end hang themselves. One thought, that Atlas, whome 
the poets feigne to hold up heaven with his shoulders, would be 
wearie, and let the skie fall upon him : another would spend a 
whole dale upon a stage, imagining that he both heard and saw 
interludes, and therewith made himselfe great sport. One Theophilus 
a physician, otherwise sound inough of mind (as it is said) imagined 
that he heard and sawe musicians continuallie plaieng on instrumentss, 
in a certeine place of his house. One Bessus, that had killed his father, 
was notablie detected ; by imagining that a swallowe upraided him 
therewith : so as he himselfe thereby revealed the murther. 
But the notablest example heereof is, of one that was in great 44. 
perplexi/tie, imagining that his nose was as big as a house ; insomuch Of one that 
as no freend nor physician could deliver him from this conceipt, nor mdanchoUe 
yet either ease his greefe, or satisfie his fansie in that behalfe : till at induced 
' ° ' to thinke that 
the last, a physician more expert in this humor than the rest, used he had a nose 
this devise following. First, when he was to come in at the chamber house, ^^o. 
doore being wide open, he suddenlie staled and withdrew himselfe ; 
so as he would not in any wise approch neerer than the doore. The 
melancholike person musing heereat, asked him the cause why he so 
demeaned himselfe ? Who answered him in this maner : Sir, your 
nose is so great, that I can hardlie enter into your chamber but I 
shall touch it, and consequentlie hurt it. Lo (quoth he) this is the 
man that must doo me good ; the residue of my freends flatter me, 
G

--- PAGE 140 ---
42 
3. Booke. 
The discoverie 
54- 
Danceus in 
dialog, cap. 3. 
J. Baptist. P. 
N. cap. 2. 
Card, de 
var. rcrum. 
J. WIer. de 
prestigiis dce- 
monum, &'c. 
Aristotle. 
John. Bod. 
45. 
55- 
and would hide mine infirmitie from me. Well (said the physician) I 
will cure you, but you must be content to indure a little paine in the 
dressing : which he promised patientlie to susteine, and conceived 
certeine hope of his recoverie. Then entred the physician into the 
chamber, creeping close by the walles, seeming to feare the touching 
and hurting of his nose. Then did he blindfold him, which / being 
doone, he caught him by the nose with a paire of pinsors, and threw 
downe into a tub, which he had placed before his patient, a great 
quantitie of bloud, with manie peeces of bullocks livers, which he had 
conveied into the chamber, whilest the others eies were bound up, 
and then gave him libertie to see and behold the same. He having 
doone thus againe twoo or three times, the melancholike humor was 
so qualified, that the mans mind being satisfied, his greefe was eased, 
and his disease cured. 
Thrasibuliis, otherwise called Thrasilius, being sore oppressed 
with this melancholike humor, imagined, that all the ships, which 
arrived at port PyrcBus, were his : insomuch as he would number 
them, and command the mariners to lanch, &c : triumphing at their 
safe returnes, and moorning for their misfortunes. The Italian, whom 
we called here in England, the Monarch, was possessed with the like 
spirit or conceipt. Danceus him.selfe reporteth, that he sawe one, that 
affirmed constantlie that he was a cocke ; and saith that through 
melancholie, such were alienated from themselves. 
Now, if the fansie of a melancholike person may be occupied in 
causes which are both false and impossible ; why should an old witch 
be thought free from such fantasies, who (as the learned philosophers 
and physicians saie) upon the stopping of their monethlie melancholike 
flux or issue of bloud, in their age must needs increase therein, as 
(through their weaknesse both of bodie and braine) the aptest 
persons to meete with such melancholike imaginations : with whome 
their imaginations remaine, even when their senses are gone. Which 
Bodin laboureth to disproove, therein shewing himselfe as good a 
physician, as else-where a divine. 
But if they may imagine, that they can transforme their owne 
bodies, which neverthelesse remaineth in the former shape : how 
much more credible is it, that they may falselie suppose they can hurt 
and infeeble other mens bodies ; or which is lesse, hinder the com- 
ming of butter ? &c. But what is it that they will not imagine, and 
consequenthe confesse that they can doo ; speciallie being so earnestlie 
persuaded thereunto, so sorelie tor/mented, so craftilie examined, 
vrith such promises of favour, as wherby they imagine, that they shall 
ever after live in great credit & welth ? &c. 
If you read the executions doone upon witches, either in times/ past

--- PAGE 141 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 10. 
in other countries, or latelie in this land ; you shall see such im- 
possibilities confessed, as none, having his right wits, will beleeve. 
Among other like false confessions, we read that there was a witch Ant.Houin. 
confessed at the time of hir death or execution, that she had raised 
all the tempests, and procured all the frosts and hard weather that 
happened in the winter 1565 : and that manie grave and wise men 
beleeved hir. 
The tenth Chapter. 
That volimiarie confessions may be ttntrulie made, to the undooing 
of the co7ifessors, and of the strange operation of melancholie, 
prooved by a familiar and late example. 
UT that it may appeere, that even voluntarie confession 
(in this case) may be untrulie made, though it tend to the 
destruction of the confessor ; and that melancholic may 
moove imaginations to that effect : I will cite a notable 
instance concerning this matter, the parties themselves being yet 
alive, and dwelling in the parish of Sellenge in Kent, and the matter 
not long sithence in this sort performed. 
One Ade Davie, the wife of Si?non Davie, husbandman, being A Kentish 
reputed a right honest bodie, and being of good parentage, grew iate accident, 
suddenlie (as hir husband informed mee, and as it is well knowne in 
these parts) to be somewhat pensive and more sad than in times past. 
Which thing though it greeved him, yet he was loth to make it so 
appeere, as either his wife might be troubled or discontented there- 
with, or his neighbours informed thereof ; least ill husbandrie should 
be laid to his charge (which in these quarters is much abhorred.) But 
when she grew from pensivenes, to some perturbation of mind ; so as 
hir accustomed rest began in the night season to be withdrawne from 
hir, through sighing and secret lamentation ; and that, not without 
teares, hee could not but demand the cause of hir conceipt and extra- 
ordina/rie moorning. But although at that time she covered the same, ^6. 
acknowledging nothing to be amisse with hir : soone after notwith- 
standing she fell downe before him on hir knees, desiring him to 
forgive hir, for she had greevouslie offended (as she said) both God 
& him. Hir poore husband being abashed at this hir behaviour, 
comforted hir, as he could ; asking hir the cause of hir trouble & 
greefe : who told him, that she had, (contrarie to Gods lawe) & to 
the offense of all good christians, to the injurie of him, & speciallie to 
the losse of hir owne soule, bargained and given hir soule to the 
divell, to be delivered unto him within short space. Whereunto hir ^ristiin 
husband answered, saieng ; 
is void and of none effect : Wife, be of good cheere, this thy bargaine comfor' of the 
r 1 1 lit.-,- nus'iad to 
for thou hast sold that which is none of his wife.

--- PAGE 142 ---
3- Booke. 
The discoverie 
thine to sell ; sith it belongeth to Christ, who hath bought it, and 
deerelie paid for it, even with his bloud, which he shed upon the 
crosse ; so as the divell hath no interest in thee./ After this, with like 
submission, teares, and penitence, she said unto him ; Oh husband, I 
have yet committed another fault, and doone you more injurie : for I 
have bewitched you and your children. Be content (quoth he) by the 
grace of God, Jesus Christ shall unwitch us : for none evill can 
happen to them that feare God. 
And (as trulie as the Lord liveth) this was the tenor of his words 
unto me, which I knowe is true, as proceeding from unfeigned lips, 
and from one that feareth God. Now when the time approched that 
the divell should come, and take possession of the woman, according 
to his bargaine, he watched and praied earnestlie, and caused his wife 
to read psalmes and praiers for mercie at Gods hands : and suddenlie 
about midnight, there was a great rumbling beelowe under his 
chamber windowe, which amazed them exceedinglie. For they con- 
ceived, that the divell was beelowe, though he had no power to come 
up, bicause of their fervent praiers. 
He that noteth this womans first and second confession, freelie and 
voluntarilie made, how everie thing concurred that might serve to 
adde credit thereunto, and yeeld matter for hir condemnation, would 
not thinke, but that if Bodin were foreman of hir inquest, he would 
crie ; Guiltie : & would hasten execution upon hir ; who would have 
said as much before any judge in/ the world, if she had beene 
examined ; and have confessed no lesse, if she had beene arraigned 
therupon. But God knoweth, she was innocent of anie these crimes : 
howbeit she was brought lowe and pressed downe with the weight of 
this humor, so as both hir rest and sleepe were taken awaie from hir ; 
& hir fansies troubled and disquieted with despaire, and such other 
cogitations as grew by occasion thereof. And yet I beleeve, if any 
mishap had insued to hir husband, or his children \ few witchmongers 
would have judged otherwise, but that she had bewitched them. And 
she (for hir part) so constantlie persuaded hir selfe to be a witch, 
that she judged hir seife worthie of death ; insomuch as being reteined 
in hir chamber, she sawe not anie one carrieng a faggot to the fier, 
but she would sale it was to make a fier to burne hir for witcherie. 
But God knoweth she had bewitched none, neither insued there anie 
hurt unto anie, by hir imagination, but unto hir selfe. 
And as for the rumbling, it was by occasion of a sheepe, which was 
flawed, and hoong by the wals, so as a dog came and devoured it ; 
whereby grew the noise which I before mentioned : and she being 
now recovered, remaineth a right honest woman, far from such 
impietie, and ashamed of hir imaginations, which she perceiveth to 
have growne through melancholic.

