n the selfesame houre. According to that which is 
Matt. 12, 22. said in the 12. of Matthew ; There was brought unto Christ one pos- 
sessed of a divell, which was both blind and dumbe, and he healed 
him : so as, he that was blind and dumbe both spake and sawe. 
But it was the man, and not the divell, that was healed, 
and made to speake and see. Whereby (I saie) it is 
gathered, that such as were diseased, as well 
as they that were lunatike, were 
said sometimes to be 
possessed of 
divels.

--- PAGE 529 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 15. 
The XV. Chapter. 
Of the possessed with divels. 
I ERE I cannot omit to shew, how fondlie diverse writers ; 
and namelie, James Sprenger, and Henrie histitor doo 
gather and note the cause, why the divell maketh choise to 
possesse men at certeine times of the moone ; which is 
(saie they) in two respects : first, that they may defame so good a 
creature as the moone ; secondly, bicause the braine is the moistest 
part of the bodie. The divell therefore considereth the aptnesse and 
conveniencie thereof (the *moone having dominion over all moist 
things) so as they take advantage therby, the better to bring their 
purposes to passe. And further they saie, that divels being conjured 
and called up, appeere and come sooner in some certeine constella- 
tions, than in other some : thereby to induce men to thinke, that 
there is some godhead in the starres. But when Sanle was releeved 
with the sound of the harpe, they saie that the departure of the divell 
was/ by meanes of the signe of the crosse imprinted in Davids veines. 
Whereby we male see how absurd the imaginations and de/vises of 
men are, when they speake according to their owne fansies, without 
vi'arrant of the word of God. But me thinks it is verie absurd that 
Joseplius affirmeth; to wit, that the divell should be thrust out of anie 
man by vertue of a root. And as vaine it is, that yElianus writeth 
of the magicall herbe Cynospasttis, otherwise called Agla\o\photis ; 
which is all one with Salomons root named Baaros, as having force 
to drive out anie divell from a man possessed. 
Mai. maUf. 
quast. 5. fa. 
* A maxime 
in philoso- 
phic, as 
the sunne 
in arid is &^ 
siccis. 
514- 
369. 
Joseph, de an 
tiquitat. Jud. 
item de bello 
Jud. lib. 7. ca 
35- 
The xvi. Chapter. 
That we bei7tg not throughlie informed of the ttattire of divels 
a?id spirits, must satisfie our selves with that which is de- 
livered us in the scriptures touching the same, how this word 
divell is to be understood both in the singular and plurall num- 
ber, of the spirit of God and the spirit of the divell, of tame 
spirits, of Ahab. 
I HE nature therfore and substance of divels and spirits, 
bicause in the scripture it is not so set down, as we may 
certeinlie know the same : we ought to content and 
frame our selves faithfullie to beleeve the words and sense 
there delivered unto us by the high spirit, which is the Holie-ghost, Num. 27, 16.

--- PAGE 530 ---
432 
Chap. 1 6. 
A discourse of 
who is Lord of all spirits ; alwaies considering, that evermore spirits 
are spoken of in scripture, as of things spiritual!; though for the helpe 
of our capacities they are there sometimes more grosselie and corpo- 
rallie expressed, either in parables or by metaphors, than indeed they 
I.Reg. i8. are. As for example (and to omit the historie of Job^vi\\\c\v else- 
ve"e! 4.^ where I handle) it is written ; The Lord said, Who shall entise Ahab, 
that he maie fall at Ramoth Gilead, &'c? Then came foorth a spirit, 
and stood before the Lord, and said ; I will entise him. And the 
Lord said. Wherewith ? And he said ; I will go and be a lieng spirit 
in the mouth of all his prophets. Then he said ; Go foorth, thou 
shalt prevaile, &c./ 
jij. This storie is here set foorth in this wise, to beare with our capaci- 
ties, and speciallie with the capacitie of that age, that could not 
otherwise conceive of spirituall things, than by such corporall demon- 
strations. And yet here is to be noted, that one spirit, and not 
manie or diverse, did possesse all the false prophets at once. Even 
Luke. 8. another place, manie thousand divels are said to possesse one 
Mark. 5. 9. man : and yet it is also said even in the selfe same place, that the 
same man was possessed onelie with one divell. For it is there said 
that Christ met a man, which had a divell, and he commanded the 
% Cal. l1b.7n- fovvle spirit to come foorth of the man, &c. But Cahn'ne saith ; 
s/il. no. I. cap. . 
14. sect. 14. Where sathan or the divell is named in the singular number, thereby 
is meant that power of wickednesse, that standeth against the king- 
dome of justice. And where manie divels are named in the scrip- 
tures, we are thereby taught, that we must fight with an infinite- 
multitude of enimies ; least despising the fewnesse of them, we should 
be more slacke to enter into battell, and so fall into securitie and 
idlenes. 
On the other side, it is as plainelie set downe in the scripture, that 
370. some/ are possessed with the spirit of God, as that the other are endued 
and bound with the spirit of the divell. Yea sometimes we read. 
Num. II. that one good spirit was put into a great number of persons ; and 
againe, that diverse spirits rested in and upon one man : and yet no 
reall or corporall spirit meant. As for example ; The Lord tooke of 
Ibid. vers. 25 the Spirit that was upon Moses, and put it upon the seventie elders, and 
when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied. Why should not 
this be as substantiall and corporall a spirit, as that, wherewith the 
Acts 16. maid in the Ac^s of the apostles was possessed ? Also Elisha in- 
Judg!^-i.^io. treated Elia, that when he departed, his spirit might double upon 
Mbilf'i" 6^^' xtd^di also that the spirit of the Lord came upon ^ Othniel, 
c Ibid. 14. 6. upon '^Gedeon, '^Jeptha, ^Samson., ^Balaam, ^Saule, ^David, ^Ezechiel, 
e i^sam^te.^ ^Zacharic, "^Ainasay : yea it is written, that Caleb had another spirit 
'3- than all the Israelits beside : & in another place it is said, that

--- PAGE 531 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 17. 
433 
^Daniel had a more excellent spirit than anie other. So as, though 
the spirits, as well good as bad, are said to be given by number and 
proportion ; yet the qualitie and not the quantitie of them is alwaies 
thereby ment and presupposed. Howbeit I must confesse, that 
Christ had the spirit of God without mea/sure, as it is written in the 
evangelist John. But where it is said that spirits can be made tame, 
and at commandement, I saie to those grosse conceivers of scripture 
with Salomon., who (as they falslie affirme was of all others the 
greatest conjuror) saith thus in expresse words ; No man is lord over 
a spirit, to reteine a spirit at his pleasure. 
[Azariah is omitted in the text, and the margin references are wrong; they are rightly given 
opposite. ] 
The xvii. Chapter. 
f I. Sam. 18. 
14. 
B Ezec. II. s 
^ 2. Chr. 14. 
• i.Ch. 12. 18. 
k Numb. 14. 
1 Dan. 5. II. 
John. 3, 34. 
Whether spirits and soules can assume bodies, and of their 
creation and substance, wherein writers doo extreamelie contend 
and varie. 
OME hold opinion, that spirits and soules can assume & 
take unto them bodies at their pleasure, of what shape 
or substance they list : of which mind all papists, and 
some protestants are, being more grosse than another 
sort, which hold, that such bodies are made to their hands. How- 
beit, these doo varie in the elements, wherewith these spirituall bodies 
are composed. For (as I have said) some affirme that they consist 
of fier, some thinke of aier, and some of the starres and other celestiall 
powers. But if they be celestiall, then (as Peter Martyr sa.\th) must 
they follow the circular motion : and if they be elementarie, then 
must they follow the motions of those elements, of which their bodies 
consist. Of aier they cannot be : for aier is Corpus homogeniwn ; so 
as everie part of aier is aier, whereof there can be no distinct members 
made. For an organicall bodie must have bones, sinewes, veines, 
flesh, &c : which cannot be made of aier. Neither (as Peter Martyr 
afifirmeth) can an aierie bodie receive or have either shape or figure. 
But some ascend up into the clouds, where they find (as they 
saie) diverse shapes and formes even in the aier. Unto 
which objection P. Martyr answereth, saieng, 
and that trulie, that clouds are not/ 
altogether aier, but have a mix- 
ture of other elements 
mingled with 
them.,' 
516. 
Eccles. 8. [8.] 
\^ Judg. 3. 10. 
b [Judg. 6. 34.] 
c Judg. II. [slg. 
<i|Ibid 14. 6. 
e Num. 24. 2 
f [i. Sam. II. 3.] 
g 1 Sam. 16. 13. 
I. Sam. 18. 14. 
h Ezec. II. 5 
li«2Chr. 14. [i5-i- 
is Azariah,] 
1 [Zech. 24. 20.] 
ki Chr. 12. 18. 
Num. 14. [24.]] 
For everie 
natural! 
motion is 
either cir- 
cular or e- 
lemetarie. 
3'?!.

--- PAGE 532 ---
434 
Chap. i8. 
A discourse of 
517- 
The xviii. Chapter. 
Gen. 18, IQ. 
J. Bod. lib. de 
dam. 3. ca. 4. 
518. 
E.xod. 12 29. 
Psa. 104. 20. 
Certeine popish reasons concerning spirits tnade of aier, of daie divels 
and night divels, and why the divell loveth no salt in his 7neate. 
ANIE affirme (upon a fable cited by 71/. Mai.) that spirits 
are of aier, bicause they have beene cut (as he saith) in 
sunder, and closed presentlie againe ; and also bicause 
they vanish awaie so suddenlie. But of such apparitions 
I have alreadie spoken, and am shortlie to saie more, which are 
rather scene in the imagination of the weake and diseased, than in 
veritie and truth. Which sights and apparitions, as they have beene 
common among the unfaithfull ; so now, since the preaching of the 
gospell they are most rare. And as among faintharted people ; 
namelie, women, children, and sicke folkes, they usuallie swarmed : 
so among strong bodies and good stomachs they never used to 
appeare ; as elsewhere I have prooved : which argueth that they 
were onelie phantasticall and imaginarie. Now saie they that imagine 
divels and spirits to be made of aier, that it must needs be that they 
consist of that element ; bicause otherwise when they vanish sudden- 
lie awaie, they should leave some earthie substance behind them. 
If they were of water, then should they moisten the place where 
they stand, and must needs be shed on the floore. If they consisted 
of fier, then would they burne anie thing that touched them : and 
yet (saie they) Abraham and Lot washed their feete, and were neither 
scalded nor burnt. 
I find it not in the Bible, but in Bodin, that there are daie divels, 
and night divels. The same fellow saith, that Deber is the name of 
that divell, which hurteth by night ; and Cheleb is he that hurteth by 
daie : howbeit, he confesseth that Sathan can hurt both by daie and 
by night ; although it be certeine (as he saith) that he can doo more 
harme by night than by daie ; producing for example, how in a night 
he slew the first borne of ALgypt.j And yet it appeareth plainelie i 
the text, that the Lord himselfe did it. Whereby it seemeth, that 
Bodin putteth no difference betweene God and the divell. For further 
confirmation of this his foolish assertion, that divels are more valiant 
by night than by daie, he alledgeth the 104. Psahne, wherein is 
written, Thou makest darknesse, and it is night, wherein all the 
beasts of the forrest creepe foorth, the lions rore, &c : when the 
sunne riseth, they retire, &c. So as now he maketh all beasts to be 
divels, or divels to be beasts. Oh barbarous blindnes ! This Bodin

--- PAGE 533 ---
Dive Is and spirits. 
Chap. 19, 
435 
also saith, that the divell loveth no salt in his meate, for that it is a M.de 
signe of eternitie, and used by Gods commandement in all sacrifices; ^' 
abusing the scriptures, which he is not ashamed to quote in that Levit. i. 
behalfe. But now I will declare how the scripture teacheth our dull 
capacities to conceive what maner of thing the divell is, by the verie 
names appropriated unto him in the same./ 
The xix. Chapter. 372, 
That such divels as are mentioned in the scriptures, have in their 
names their nature and qualities expressed, with instancies 
thereof. 
UCH divels as are mentioned in the scriptures by name, 
have in their names their nature and qualities expressed, 
being for the most part the idols of certeine nations 
idolatrouslie erected, in steed, or rather in spight of God. 
For Beelzebub, which signifieth the lord of the flies, bicause he 2. Reg. 13. 
taketh everie simple thing in his web, was an idol or oracle erected 
at Ekron, to whom Ahaziah sent to know whether he should recover 
his disease : as though there had beene no God in Israeli. This 
divell Beelzebub was among the Jewes reputed the principall divell. Matth. 10. 
The GrcEcians called him P/zif/i?, the Lati7ies Sionanus, quasi summum MaA. 3. 
deorum manium, the cheefe ghost or spirit of the dead whom they Luk. u. 
supposed to walke by night : although they absurdlie beleeved also 
that the soule died with the bodie. So as they did put a difference 
be/tweene the ghost of a man and the soule of a man : and so doo ^ig. 
our papists ; howbeit, none otherwise, but that the soule is a ghost, 
when it walketh on the earth, after the dissolution of the bodie, or 
appeareth to anie man, either out of heaven, hell, or purgatorie, and 
not otherwise. ^ Nisroch signifieth a delicate tentation, and was [* Tartac] 
worshipped by Senacherib in Assyria. ^Tarcat* is in English, fettered, ° ^- ^^s- '^9- 
and was the divell or idoll of the Hevites. " Beelphegor, o\.htr^\sQ 6se. 9, n. [10] 
called Priapus, the gaping or naked god was worshipped among the 0"™. 3,^&. 4 
Moabits. ^ Adramelech, that is, the cloke or power of the king, was 1°^";^^^ j 
an idoll at Sepharvais, which was a citie of the Assyrians. ^Chamos, « Numb. 21! 
that is feeling, or departing, was worshipped among the Moabits. 2.' Reg. 23! 
^ Dagon, that is, come or greefe, was the idoll of the Philistines. ^^^'^^^.^^^^ 
^ Astarte, that is, a fold or flocke, is the name of a shee idoll at g i. Reg. n'. 
Sydonia, whom Salomon worshipped : some thinke it was Venus.

--- PAGE 534 ---
436 
Chap. 20. 
A discou7'se of 
k 2. Reg. 23. 
1. Chro. 20. 
Jerem 49. 
Joseph, lib. di 
antiquit. 
JudeEor. 6. 
cap. 14- 
1. Sam. 7. 
2, Reg. 23. 
Psal. 96. [Vulg. 
vers.] 
373. 
Melchom, that is, a king, was an idoll or divell, which the sonnes of 
Amrno7i worshipped. 
Sometimes also we find in the scriptures, that divels and spirits 
take their names of wicked men, or of the houses or stats of abhom- 
inable persons : as Astaroth, which (as Josephus saith) was the idoll 
of the Philistines, whome the Jewes tooke from them at Salomons 
commandement, and was also worshipped of Salomon. Which 
though it signifie riches, flocks, &c : yet it was once a citie belonging 
to the king of Basan, where they saie the giants dwelt. In these 
respects Astaroth is one of the speciall divels named in Salomons 
conjuration, and greatlie emploied by the conjurors. I have suffici- 
entlie prooved in these quotations, that these idols are Dii gentium, 
the gods of the Gentiles : and then the prophet David may satisfie 
you, that they are divels, who saith Dii gentium datnonia sunt, The 
gods of the Gentiles are divels. What a divell was the rood of grace 
to be thought, but such a one as before is mentioned and described, 
who tooke his name of his courteous and gratious behaviour towards 
his worshippers, or rather those that offered/ unto him? The idolatrous 
knaverie wherof being now bewraied, it is among the godlie reputed 
a divell rather than a god : and so are diverse others of the same 
stampe./ 
520. 
The XX. Chapter. 
» Job. 40. 
Job. 3. 
Isai. 27. 
*> Matth. 6. 
Matt. 4, &c. 
Marc. 16. 
' Jain. 2. 
•l Matth. 4. 
John. 8. 
Apoc. 12. 
«. Apoc. 9. 
Diverse names of the dii'ell, whereby his nature and disposition 
is manifested. 
T hath also pleased GOD to informe our weake capacities, 
as it were by similitudes and examples, or rather by com- 
parisons, to understand what manner of thing the divell 
is, by the verie names appropriated and attributed unto 
him in the scriptures : wherein sometimes he is called by one name, 
sometimes by another, by metaphors according to his conditions. 
* Elephas is called in Job, Behemoth, which is, Bruta ; whereby the 
greatnes and brutishnes of the divell is figured. Leviathan is not 
much different from Elephas ; whereby the divels great subtiltie and 
power is shewed unto us. ^Mammon is the covetous desire of monie, 
wherewith the divell overcommeth the reprobate. Dmnon signifieth 
one that is cunning or craftie. Cacodcemon is perverslie knowing. 
All those which in ancient times were worshipped as gods, were so 
called. '^Diabolus is Calumniator, an accuser, or a slanderer. Sathan 
is Adversarius, an ad\'ersarie, that troubleth and molesteth. "Abad-

--- PAGE 535 ---
Divels and spirits. 
Chap. 21. 
437 
don 2l destroier. ' Leaio, bicaiise they are manie. « Prince of the J Marc. 5. 
. Luke. 8. 
aire. ''Prince of the world. 'A king of the sonnes of pride. ■'A g Eph. 2. 
roring lion. ' An homicide or manslear, a Her, and the father of Hes. i^^"^"' ^' 
The " author of sinne. °A spirit. Yea somtimes he is called the 'Job. 41. 
k I. Pet 5. 
spirit of the Lord, as the executioner and minister of his displeasure, 1 John. 8. 
&c. Sometimes, the ° spirit of fornication, &c. And manie other irAct°''i"6 
like epithets or additions are given him for his name. He is also 0056.4. 
P Psal ■XA 
called P the angell of the Lord, q The cruell angell. The ""angell of i. chr. 21.' 
sathan. The ^ angell of hell. The 'great dragon, for his pride and rf'^Cor'i'2 
force. The u red dragon for his blouddines. A x serpent. Anvowle, ^Apoc. 9, 
a z kite, a satyre, a crowe, a pellicane, a hedghog, a griph, a storke, u^ob!^47. 
&C./ y-^^J'^- 3^ 
[x should reach to Isai. 27. and y Mark Isai. 13. 34.] ^ Isai 27 ' 
Isai. 13. 34. 
The xxi. Chapter. jzr. 
That the idols or gods of the Gentiles are divels^ their diverse natnes, 
and in what affaires their labours and attthorities are emploied, 
wherein also the blind superstition of the heathen people is dis- 
covered. 
ND for so much as the idols of the gentiles are called Psalm, 96. 
divels, and are among the unlearned confounded and 
intermedled with the divels that are named in the scrip- 
tures ; I thought it convenient here to give you a note of 
them, to whome the Gentiles gave names, according to the offices ^ ^ 
unto them assigned. Penates are the domesticall gods, or rather Minerva, 
divels/ that were said to make men live quietlie within doores. But 374. 
some thinke these rather to be such, as the Gentiles thought to be 
set over kingdomes : and that Lares are such as trouble private 
houses, and are set to oversee crosse waies and cities. Larvce are 
said to be spirits that walke onelie by night. Ge7iii are the two 
angels, which they supposed were appointed to wait upon each man. 
Manes are the spirits which oppose themselves against men in the 
waie. Damones were feigned gods by poets, as Jupiter, funo, &c. 
Virunculi terrei are such as was Robin good fellowe, that would Cousening 
supplie the office of servants, speciallie of maids ; as to make a fier knaves^^ 
in the morning, sweepe the house, grind mustard and malt, drawe 
water, &c : these also rumble in houses, drawe latches, go up and 
downe staiers, &c. Dii geniales are the gods that everie man did Terra, aqua, 
sacrifice unto at the daie of their birth. Tetrici be they that make %''j:,fna.' " ' 
folke afraid, and have such ouglie shape, which manie of our divines

--- PAGE 536 ---
Chap. 21. 
A discourse of 
" Hudgin of 
Germanie, 
and Rush 
of England. 
[• Hutgin, 
Wier.^ 
[t See note.] 
J. Wier. lib. 
de priest, dam. 
J. cap. 23. 
Bawdie 
preests in 
Ginnie. 
doo call Subterranei. Cobuli are they that followe men, and delight 
to make them laugh, with tumbling, juggling, and such like toies. 
Virunculi are dwarfes about three handfulles long, and doo no hurt ; 
but seeme to dig in mineralles, and to be verie busie, and yet doo 
nothing. Giiteli or TruUi are spirits (they saie) in the likenes of 
^22. women, shewing great kind/nesse to all men : & hereof it is that we 
call light women, truls. Damones moniani are such as worke in the 
mineralles, and further the worke of the labourers woonderfullie, who 
are nothing afraid of them. Hudgin is a verie familiar divell, which 
will doo no bodie hurt, except he receive injurie : but he cannot abide 
that, nor yet be mocked : he talketh with men freendlie, sometimes 
visiblie, and sometimes invisiblie. There go as manie tales upon 
this Hudgin, in some parts of Germanie, as there did in England of 
Robin good fellowe. But this Hudgin was so called, bicause he 
alwaies ware a cap or a hoodt ; and therefore I thinke it was Robin 
hood. Frier Rush was for all the world such another fellow as this 
Hudgin, and brought up even in the same schoole ; to wit, in a 
kitchen: in so much as the selfe-same tale is written of the one as of 
the other, concerning the skuUian, which is said to have beene slaine, 
&c : for the reading whereof I referre you to Frier Rush his storie, 
or else to Joh7i Wierus De prastigiis damonum. 
There were also Familiares dcemones, which we call familiars : such 
as Socrates and Casar were said to have ; and such as Feats sold to 
doctor Burcot. Quintus Sertorius had Diana hir selfe for his fami- 
liar ; and Nuina Pompilius had Aegeria : but neither the one nor 
the other of all these could be preserved by their familiars from 
being destroied with untimelie death. Simon Samareus boasted, 
that he had gotten by conjuration, the soule of a little child that was 
slaine, to be his familiar, and that he told him all things that were 
to come, &c. I marvell what privilege soules have, which are de- 
parted from the bodie, to know things to come more than the soules 
within mans bodie. There were spirits, which they called Alba 
mulieres, and AlbcE Silyllce, which were verie familiar, and did much 
harme (they saie) to women with child, and to sucking children. 
Deumus as a divell is worshipped among the Indians in Calecute, who 
(as they thinke) hath power given him of God to judge the earth, &c: 
his image is horriblie pictured in a most ouglie shape. Thevet saith, 
375. that a divell/ in America, called Agnan, beareth swaie in that countrie. 
In Ginnie one Grigrie is accounted the great divell, and keepeth the 
woods : these have preests called Charoibes, which prophesie, after 
they have lien by the space of one houre prostrate upon a wench/ 
of twelve yeares old, and all that while (saie they) he calleth upon a 
divell called Hovioulsira, and then commeth foorth and uttereth his

--- PAGE 537 ---
Dive Is and spirits. chap. 22. 439 
prophesie. For the true successe whereof the people praie all the 
while that he lieth groveling like a lecherous knave. There are a 
thousand other names, which they saie are attributed unto divels ; 
and such as they take to themselves are more ridiculous than the 
names that are given by others, which have more leasure to devise 
them. In litle bookes conteining the cousening possessed, at Looke in 
Maidstone, where such a woonder was wrought, as also in other io^\lh. 7. 
places, you may see a number of counterfeit divels names, and other j^^"' j^*^' 
Irish trash. 
The xxii. Chapter. 
Of the Romanes cheefe gods called Dii selectt, and of other 
heathen gods, their names and offices. 
HERE were among the Rotnafis twentie idolatrous gods, 
which were called Dii selecti sive electi, chosen gods ; 
whereof twelve were male, and eight female, whose 
names doo thus followe : Janus, Saturnus, Jupiter, 
Geniits, Merctirius, Apollo, Mars, Vulcanus, Neptunus, Sol, Orcus 
and *Vibar, which were all hee gods : Tellus, Ceres, Juno, Minerva, 
Luna, Diana, Venus, and Vesta, were all she gods. No man might 
appropriate anie of these unto himselfe, but they were left common 
and indifferent to all men dwelling in one realme, province, or 
notable citie. These heathen gentiles had also their gods, which 
served for sundrie purposes ; as to raise thunder, they had Statores, 
Tonantes, Feretrii, and Jupiter Elicius. They had Cantius, to 
whome they praied for wise children, who was more apt for this 
purpose than Minerva that issued out of Jupiters owne braine. 
Lucina was to send them that were with child safe deliverie, and in 
that respect was called the mother of childwives. Opis was called 
the mother of the babe new borne, whose image women with child 
hanged upon their girdles before their bellies, and bare it so by/ the 
space of nine moneths ; and the midwife alwaies touched the child 
therewith, before she or anie other laied hand thereon. 
If the child were well borne, they sacrificed therunto, although the 
mother miscaried : but if the child were in any part unperfect, or 
dead, &c : they used to beate the image into powder, or to burne or 
