lie the same small ball is to be practised in 
the palme of the hand, and by use you shall not onelie seeme to put 
anie one ball from you, and yet reteine it in your hand ; but you 
shall keepe foure or five as cleanelie and certeinelie as one. This 
being atteined unto, you shall worke woonderfull feats : as for 
example. 
322. 
Great vari- 
elie of plaie 
with the 
balles, &c 
227. 
These feats 
are nimbly, 
cleanly, & 
swiftly to 
be convei- 
ed ; so as the 
eies of the 
beholders 
mav not

--- PAGE 362 ---
264 
1 3. Booke. 
The discoverie 
discerne or 
perceive 
the drift. 
Memoran- 
dum that 
the juggler 
must set a 
good grace 
on the mat- 
ter : for that 
is verie re- 
quisite. 
» As, Hej-, 
fortuna fu- 
rie, nun- 
quam cre- 
do, passe, 
passe, when 
come you 
sirra : See 
tag. I47' 
Laie three or foure balles before you, and as manie small candle- 
sticks, holies, saltsellers, or saltseller covers, which is the best. 
Then first seeme to put one ball into your left hand, and therwithall 
seeme to hold the same fast : then take one of the candlesticks, 
or anie other thing (having a hollow foot, & not being too great) and 
seeme to put the ball which is thought to be in your left hand, under- 
neath the same, and so under the other candlesticks seeme to bestow 
the other balles : and all this while the beholders will suppose each 
ball to be under each candlesticke : this doone, some charme or 
forme of words is commonlie used. Then take up one candlesticke 
3^3- with one hand, and blow, saieng ; Lo, you see that is/ gone : & so 
likewise looke under ech candlesticke with like grace and words, & 
the beholders will woonder where they are become. But if you, in 
lifting up the candlesticks with your right hand, leave all those three 
or foure balles under one of them (as by use you may easilie doo, 
having turned them all downe into your hand, and holding them fast 
with your little and ringfingers) and take the candlesticke with your 
other fingers, and cast the balles up into the hollownes thereof (for 
so they will not roll so soone awaie) the standers by will be much 
astonied. But it will seeme woonderfull strange, if also in shewing 
how there remaineth nothing under an other of those candlesticks, 
taken up with your left hand, you leave behind you a great ball, or 
anie other thing, the miracle will be the greater. For first they 
thinke you have pulled awaie all the balles by miracle ; then, that 
you have brought them all togither againe by like meanes, and they 
neither thinke nor looke that anie other thing remaineth behind under 
anie of them. And therefore, after manie other feats doone, returne 
to your candlesticks, remembring where you left the great ball, and 
in no wise touch the same ; but having an other like ball about you, 
seeme to bestow the same in maner and forme aforesaid, under a 
candlesticke which standeth furthest fro that where the ball lieth. 
And when you shall with *words or charmes seeme to conveie the 
same ball from under the same candlesticke, and afterward bring it 
under the candlesticke which you touched not, it will (I saie) seeme 
woonderfull strange. 
To jnake a little ball swell in your hand till it be verie great. 
TAke a verie great ball in your left hand, or three indiiTerent big 
balles ; and shewing one or three little balles, seeme to put 
them into your said left hand, concealing (as you may well doo) the 
other balles which were there in before : then use words, and make

--- PAGE 363 ---
of Witchcraft . chap 24- 265 
them seeme to swell, and open your hand, &c. This plaie is to be 
varied a hundreth waies : for as you find them all under one candle- 
sticke, so may you go to a stander by, and take off/ his hat or cap, 228. 
and shew the balles to be there, by conveieng them thereinto, as you 
turne the bottome upward./ 
To consume {or rather to conveie) one or nianie balles into 
nothing. 
IF you take one ball, or more, & seeme to put it into your other 
hand, and whilest you use charming words, you conveie them 
out of your right hand into your lap ; it will seeme strange. For 
when you open your left hand immediatlie, the sharpest lookers on 
will saie it is in your other hand, which also then you may open ; & 
when they see nothing there, they are greatlie overtaken. 
How to rap a wag upon the knuckles. 
But I will leave to speake anie more of the ball, for herein I might 
hold you all daie, and yet shall I not be able to teach you to 
use it, nor scarslie to understand what I meane or write concerning 
it : but certeinelie manie are persuaded that it is a spirit or a flie, 
&c. Me?nora}tdum,* that alwaies the right hand be kept open and 
streight, onlie keepe the palme from view. And therefore you may 
end with this miracle. ^ Laie one ball upon your shoulder, an other 
on your arme, and the third on the table : which because it is round, 
and will not easilie lie upon the point of your knife, you must bid a 
stander by laie it thereon, saieng that you meane to throwe all those 
three balles into your mouth at once : and holding a knife as a pen 
in your hand, when he is laieng it upon the point of your knife, you 
may easilie with the haft rap him on the fingers, for the other matter 
wilbe hard to doo. 
[» Rom.] 
This feate 
tendeth 
cheefelie 
to the raoo- 
ving of 
laughter 
and mirth. 
The xxiiii. Chapter. 
Of conveiance of monie. 
HE conveieng of monie is not much inferior to the ball, .j-j^^ xaarA^ 
but much easier to doo. The principall place to keepe must not be 
a peece of monie is the palme of your hand, the best nor of too 
peece to keepe is a tester ; but with exercise all will be J.u^^fgrence 
alike, except the mony be verie small, and then it is to be kept forhinde- 
M M

--- PAGE 364 ---
!66 
13. Booke. 
The discoverie 
ring of ihe 
convel- 
ance. 
betwixt the fingers, almost at the fingers end, whereas the ball is to 
be kept beelowe neere to the palme./ 
This is pret- 
tie if it be 
cunninglie 
handled : 
for both the 
eare and 
the eie is 
deceived 
by this de- 
To conveie monie out of one of your hands into the other by 
3^5- legierdemaine. 
First you must hold open your right hand, & lay therin a testor, or 
some big peece of monie : then laie thereupon the top of your 
long left finger, and use words, and upon the sudden slip your right 
hand from your finger wherwith you held downe the testor, and bend- 
ing your hand a verie little, you shall reteine the testor still therein : 
and suddenlie (I saie) drawing your right hand through your left, you 
shall seeme to have left the testor there speciallie when you shut in 
due time your left hand. Which/ that it may more plainelie appeare 
229. to be trulie doone, you may take a knife, and seeme to knocke against 
it, so as it shall make a great sound : but in stead of knocking the 
peece in the left hand (where none is) you shall hold the point of the 
knife fast with the left hand, and knocke against the testor held in 
the other hand, and it will be thought to hit against the mony in the 
left hand. Then use words, and open your hand, and when nothing 
is seene, it will be woondered at how the testor was remooved. 
To convert or transubstantiate monie into counters^ or counters 
into monie. 
ANother waie to deceive the lookers on, is to doo as before, with 
a testor ; and keeping a counter in the palme of the left hand 
secretlie to seeme to put the testor thereinto ; which being reteined 
still in the right hand, when the left hand is opened, the testor will 
seeme to be transubstantiated into a counter. 
Varietie of 
trickes may 
be shewed 
in juggling 
with mony. 
To put one testor into one hand, and an other into the other hand, 
and with words to bring thei7i togither. 
HE that hath once atteined to the facilitie of reteining one peece 
of monie in his right hand, may shew a hundreth pleasant 
conceipts by that meanes, and may reserve two or three as well as 
one. And lo then may you seeme to put one peece into your left 
hand, and reteining it still in your right hand, you may togither 
therewith take up another like peece, and so with words seeme to 
bring both peeces togither./

--- PAGE 365 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 24. 267 
To put one testor into a strangers hand, and another into jsd. 
your owne, and to conveie both into the stra?igers hand with 
words. 
ALso you may take two testors evenlie set togither, and put the 
same in stead of one testor, into a strangers hand, and then 
making as though you did put one testor into your left hand, with 
words you shall make it seeme that you conveie the testor in your 
hand, into the strangers hand : for when you open your said left 
hand, there shall be nothing scene ; and he opening his hand shall 
find two, where he thought was but one. By this devise (I sale) a 
hundreth conceipts may be shewed. 
How to doo the same or the like feate otherwise. 
TO keepe a testor, &c : betwixt your finger, serveth speciallie for 
this and such like purposes. Hold out your hand, and cause 
one to laie a testor upon the palme thereof, then shake the same up 
almost to your fingers ends, and putting your thombe upon it ; you 
shall easilie, with a little practise, conveie the edge betwixt the middle 
and forefinger, whilest you proffer to put it into your other hand you must 
(provided alwaies that the edge appeere not through the fingers on J^ke ^eed ^ 
the backside) which being doone, take up/ another testor (which you close and 
may cause a stander by to laie downe) and put them both together, you discre- 
either closelie instead of one into a strangers hand, or keepe them dittheart. 
still in your owne : & (after words spoken) open your hands, and 
there being nothing in one, and both peeces in the other, the behold- 
ers will woonder how they came togither. 
To thrcwe a peece of monie awaie, and to find it againe where 
you list. 
YOu may, with the middle or ringfinger of the right hand, conveie 
a testor into the palme of the same hand, & seeming to cast it 
awaie, keepe it still : which with confederacie will seeme strange : to ^"'^ 
, . o ? ercise ma- 
wit, when you find it agame, where another hath bestowed the verie keth men 
like peece. But these things without exercise cannot be doone, and p^ractTve."'^ 
therefore I will proceed to shew things to be/ brought to passe by J27. 
monie, with lesse difficultie ; & yet as strange as the rest : which 
being unknowne are marvellouslie commended, but being knowne, 
are derided, & nothing at all regarded.

--- PAGE 366 ---
268 
13- Booke. 
The discoverie 
This feat is 
the stran- 
ger if it be 
doone by 
night ; a 
candle 
placed be- 
tweene the 
lookers on 
& the jug- 
gler ; for by 
that means 
their eie- 
sight is hin- 
dered from 
discerning 
the conceit. 
[* =himwardl 
A discove- 
rie of this 
juggling 
knacke. 
231. 
328. 
With words to make a groat or a tester to leape out of a pot, or 
to run alongst upon a table. 
YOu shall see a juggler take a groat or a testor, and throwe it into 
a pot, or laie it in the midst of a table, & with inchanting 
words cause the same to leape out of the pot, or run towards him, 
or from him ward* alongst the table. Which will seeme miraculous, 
untill you knowe that it is doone with a long blacke haire of a womans 
head, fastened to the brim of a groat, by meanes of a little hole 
driven through the same with a Spanish needle. In like sort you 
may use a knife, or anie other small thing : but if you would have it 
go from you, you must have a confederate, by which meanes all 
juggling is graced and amended. 
To make a groat or a testor to sinke through a table, and to vanish 
out of a handkercher verie stratigelie. 
A Juggler also sometimes will borrow a groat or a testor, &C : and 
marke it before you, and seeme to put the same into the mid- 
dest of a handkercher, and wind it so, as you may the better see and 
feele it. Then will he take you the handkercher, and bid you feele 
whether the groat be there or naie ; and he will also require you to 
put the same under a candlesticke, or some such thing. Then will 
he send for a bason, and holding the same under the boord right 
against the candlesticke, will use certeine words of inchantments ; 
and in short space you shall heare the groat fall into the bason. This 
doone, one takes off the candlesticke, and the juggler taketh the 
handkercher by a tassell, and shaketh it ; but the monie is gone : 
which seemeth as strange as anie feate whatsoever, but being knowne, 
the miracle is turned to a bable. For it is nothing else, but to sowe 
a groat into the corner of a handkercher, finelie covered with a peece 
of linnen, little bigger than your groat : which corner you must con- 
veie in steed of the groat delivered to you, into the middle of your 
handkercher ; leaving the other either in your hand/ or lap, which 
afterwards you must/ seeme to pull through the boord, letting it fall 
into a bason, &c. 
A notable tricke to transforme a counter to a groat. 
TAke a groat, or some lesse peece of monie, and grind it verie 
thin at the one side ; and take two counters, and grind them, 
the one at the one side, the other on the other side : glew the smooth

--- PAGE 367 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 25. 
side of the groat to the smooth side of one of the counters, joining 
them so close together as may be, speciallie at the edges, which may 
be so filed, as they shall seeme to be but one peece ; to wit, one side 
a counter, and the other side a groat. Then take a verie little greene 
waxe (for that is softest and therefore best) and laie it so upon the 
smooth side of the other counter, as it doo not much discolour the 
groat : and so will that counter with the groat cleave togither, as 
though they were glewed ; and being filed even with the groat and 
-the other counter, it will seeme so like a perfect entire counter, that 
though a stranger handle it, he shall not bewraie it ; then having a 
little touched your forefinger, and the thombe of your right hand 
with soft waxe, take therewith this counterfet counter, and laie it 
downe openlie upon the palme of your left hand, in such sort as an 
auditor laieth downe his counters, wringing the same hard, so as you 
may leave the glewed counter with the groat apparentlie in the palme 
of your left hand ; and the smooth side of the waxed counter will 
sticke fast upon your thombe, by reason of the wax vvhervvith it is 
smeered, and so may you hide it at your pleasure. Provided alwaies, 
that you laie the waxed side downeward, and the glewed side upward: 
then close your hand, and in or after the closing thereof turne the 
peece, & so in stead of a counter (which they suppose to be in your 
hand) you shall seeme to have a groat, to the astonishment of the 
beholders, if it be well handled./ 
The Jug- 
gler must 
have none 
of his trin- 
kets wan- 
ting ; besides 
that, it be- 
hooveth 
him to be 
mindfull, 
least he 
mistake his 
trickes. 
The XXV. Chapter. 
329- 
An excellent feat, to make a two penie peece lie plaine in the palme 
of your hand, and to be passed from thence when you list. 
UT a little red wax (not too thin) upon the naile of your 
longest finger, then let a stranger put a two penie peece 
into the palme of your hand, and shut your fist suddenlie, 
and conveie the two penie peece upon the wax, which 
with use you may so accomplish, as no man shall perceive it. Then 
and in the meane time use *words of course, and suddenlie open 
your hand, holding the tippes of your fingers rather lower than 
higher than the palme of your hand, and the beholders will woonder 
where it is become. Then shut your hand suddenlie again, & laie 
a wager whether it be there or no ; and you may either leave it there, 
or take it awaie with you at your pleasure. This (if it be willt 
handled) hath more admiration than any other ieat of the hand. 
» As, Ailif, 
casyl, zaze, 
hit mel 
meltat : Sa- 
tumus, Ju- 
piter, Mars, 
Sol, Venus, 
Mercurie, 
Luna : or 
such like, 
[t for well]

--- PAGE 368 ---
270 '3 Booke. The discoverie 
[* Rom.] Meviorafiduin* this may be best handled, by putting the wax upon 
the two penie peece, but then must you laie it in your hand your 
selfe./ 
232. To cotiveie a tester out of ones hand that holdeth it fast. 
STicke a little wax upon your thombe, and take a stander by by 
the finger, shewing him the testor, and telling him you will put 
the same into his hand : then wring it downe hard with your waxed 
thombe, and using many words looke him in the face, & as soone as 
you perceive him to looke in your face, or fro your hand, suddenlie 
take awaie your thombe, & close his hand, and so will it seeme to 
him that the testor remaineth : even as if you wring a testor upon 
ones forehead, it will seeme to sticke, when it is taken awaie, espe- 
ciallie if it be wet. Then cause him to hold his hand still, and with 
speed put into another mans hand (or into your owne) two testors 
jjo. in stead of one, and use words of course, wher/by you shall make 
not onelie the beholders, but the holders beleeve, when they open 
their hands, that by inchantment you have brought both togither. 
To throwe a peece of monie into a deepe pond, and to fetch it agaitte 
from whence you list. 
In these 
confedera- ^ ^ut if you will worke by private confederacie, as to marke a 
THe 
had^ir'^ shilling, or anie other thing, and throwe the same into a river or deepe 
name, whi- pond, and having hid a shilling before with like marks in some other 
'v^d.*^^ ''" secret place ; bid soAe go presentlie & fetch it, making them beleeve, 
that it is the verie same which you threw into the river : the beholders 
will marvell much at it. And of such feats there may be doone a 
marvellous number ; but manie more by publike confederacie, 
whereby one may tell another how much monie he hath in his pursse, 
and a hundreth like toies, and all with monie. 
To conveie one shilling being in one hand into another, holding 
your amies abroad like a rood. 
A knacke T]!* Vermore it is necessarie to mingle some merie toies among your 
He°than^'^ *--» grave miracles, as in this case of monie, to take a shilling in 
marvellous. each hand, and holding your armes abroad, to laie a wager that you 
will put them both into one hand, without bringing them anie whit 
neerer togither. The wager being made, hold your armes abroad

--- PAGE 369 ---
1
of Witchcraft. chap. 26. 271 
like a rood, and turning about with your bodie, laie the shilHng out 
of one of your hands upon the table, and turning to the other side 
take it up with the other hand : and so you shall win your wager. 
How to rap a wag on the kmcckles. 
DEliver one peece of monie with the left hand to one, and to a 
second person another, and offer him that you would rap on 
the fingers the third ; for he (though he be ungratious and subtill) 
seeing the other receive monie, will not lightlie refuse it : and when 
he ofifereth to take it, you may rap him on the fingers with a knife, 
or somewhat else held in the right/ hand, saieng that you knew by your 
familiar, that he ment to have kept it from you./ 
Another to 
the same 
purpose 
read in pag. ^
324. 
I
233. ;
I
The xxvi. Chapter, 
331- 
To tra7isforme anie one small thmg into ante other forme by 
folding of paper. 
'AKE a sheete of paper, or a handkercher, and fold or 
double the same, so as one side be a little longer than 
an other : then put a counter betweene the two sides or 
leaves of the paper or handkercher, up to the middle of 
the top of the fold, holding the same so as it be not perceived, and 
laie a groat on the outside thereof, right against the counter, and fold 
it downe to the end of the longer side : and when you unfold it 
againe, the groat will be where the counter was, and the counter 
where the groat was ; so as some will suppose that you have transub- 
stantiated the monie into a counter, and with this manie feats may- 
be doone. 
The like or rather stranger than it may be done, with two papers 
three inches square a peece, divided by two folds into three equall 
parts at either side, so as each folded paper remaine one inch square: 
then glew the backsides of the two papers together as they are folded, 
& not as they are open, & so shall both papers seeme to be but one ; 
& which side soever you open, it shall appeare to be the same, if you 
hide handsomelie the bottome, as you may well doo with your middle 
finger, so as if you have a groat in the one and a counter in the other, 
you (having shewed but one) may by turning the paper seeme to 
transubstantiate it. This may be best performed, by putting it under 
a candlesticke, or a hat, &c : and with '-'words seeme to doo the feat. 
* Such as 
you shall 
find in pag. 
323, & 329. 
in the mar- 
ginal notes 
or some 
strange 
terms of 
your owne 
devising.

--- PAGE 370 ---
272 13. Bookc. The discover ie 
The xxvii. Chapter. 
Of cards, with good cautions how to avoid cotcsenage therein : 
speciall rules to conveie and handle the cards, and the maner and 
order how to accomplish all difficult and strange things wrought 
with cards. 
332. 
Of dice 
plaie & the 
like un- 
thriftie 
games, 
mark these 
two olde 
verses : Lu- 
dens taxillis 
bene respice 
quid sit in 234. 
illis, Mors tua 
fors tit a res 
tua sfes tua 
fendet in il- 
lis: and re- 
member 
them. 
Note. 
AVING now bestowed some waste monie among you, I 
will set you to cards ; by which kind of witchcraft a 
great number of people have juggled awaie not oneHe 
their monie, but also their lands,/ their health, their 
time, and their honestie. I dare not (as I could) shew the lewd 
juggling that chetors practise, least it minister some offense to the 
well disposed, to the simple hurt and losses, and to the wicked 
occasion of evill dooing. But I would wish all gamesters to beware, 
not onlie with what cards and dice they plaie, but speciallie with 
whome & where they exercise gaming. And to let dice passe (as 
whereby a man male be inevitablie cousened) one that is skilfull to 
make and use Bumcards, may undoo a hundreth wealthie men that 
are given to gaming : but if he have a confederate present, either of/ 
the plaiers or standers by, the mischiefe cannot be avoided. If you 
plaie among strangers, beware of him that seemes simple or drunken ; 
for under their habit the most speciall couseners are presented, & 
while you thinke by their simplicitie and imperfections to beguile 
them (and therof perchance are persuaded by their confederats, your 
verie freends as you thinke) you your selfe will be most of all over- 
taken. Beware also of bettors by, and lookers on, and namelie of 
them that bet on your side : for whilest they looke in your game 
without suspicion, they discover it by signes to your adversaries, with 
whome they bet, and yet are their confederates. 
But in shewing feats, and juggling with cards, the principall point 
consisteth in shuffling them nimblie, and alwaies keeping one certeine 
card either in the bottome, or in some knowne place of the stocke, 
foure or five cards from it. Hereby you shall seeme to worke woon- 
ders ; for it will be easie for you to see or spie one card, which 
though you be perceived to doo, it will not be suspected, if you 
shuffle them well afterwards. And this note I must give you, that in 
reserving the bottome card, you must alwaies (whilest you shuffle) 
keepe him a little before or a little behind all the cards lieng under- 
neath him, bestowing him (I sale) either a little beyond his fellowes 
befoi-e, right over the forefinger, or else behind the rest, so as the little

