arger triangle at one 
side of the Circle without on this manner with 
the names of the Trinity at the seven corners, ^ 
[tsic] viz. ^e^otoa5,t J^wa^ ISelresJ, Immanuel, written 
in the little circles. / \^ 
Scier'"" °^ "^^^ reason that Magitians give for Circles 
and their Institution, is, That so much ground 
being blessed and consecrated by holy Words, 
hath a secret force to expel all evil Spirits from the bounds thereof; 
and being sprinkled with holy water, which hath been blessed by the

--- PAGE 571 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. II. 
Master, the ground is purified from all uncleanness ; besides the holy 
Names of God written all about, whose force is very powerful ; so 
that no wicked Spirit hath the ability to break through into the Circle 
after the Master and Scholler are entered, and have closed up the 
gap, by reason of the antipathy they possesse to these Mystical 
Names. And the reason of the Triangle is, that if the Spirit be 
not easily brought to speak the truth, they may by the Exorcist 
be conjured to enter the same, where by vertue of the names of the 
Sacred Trinity, they can speak nothing but what is true and right. 
But if Astral Spirits as Faries, Nymphs, and Ghosts of men, be 
called upon, the Circle must be made with Chalk, without any Tri- 
angles ; in the place whereof the Magical Character of that Element 
to which they belong, must be described at the end of every Name./ 
Chap. II. 217. 
How to raise tip the Ghost of one that hath hanged himself . 
THis experiment must be put in practice while the Carcass 
hangs ; and therefore the Exorcist must seek out for the 
straightest hazel wand that he can find, to the top whereof he 
must binde the head of an Owl, with a bundle of St. fohn^s Wort, 
or Millies Perforatum : this done, he must be informed of some 
miserable creature that hath strangled himself in some Wood or 
Desart place (which they seldom miss to do) and while the Carcass

--- PAGE 572 ---
474 
Book XV. 
The Discovery 
The ceremo- 
nies of Necro- 
mancy. 
The Conju- 
ration. 
The answers 
of the Spirit. 
H ow to lay the 
Spirit. 
hangs, the Magitian must betake himself to the aforesaid place, at 12 
a clock at night, and begin his Conjurations in this following manner. 
First, stretch forth the consecrated Wand towards the four corners 
of the World, saying, By the mysteries of the deep, by the flames of 
Uaiml, by the power of the East, and the silence of the 7iight, by the 
holy rites of ptjccate, / conjtere and exorcize thee thou distressed Spirit, 
to present thy self here, and reveal unto me the cause of thy Calamity, 
ivliy thou didst ofl'er violence to thy own liege life, where thou art now 
in beeing, a7id where thou wilt hereafter be. 
Then gently smiting the Carcase nine times with the rod, say, / 
conjure thee thou spi^-it of this N. deceased, to answer my de?nands 
that I am to propound unto thee, as thou ever hopest for the rest of 
the holy ones, and the ease of all thy misery \ by the blood of feszi 
which he shed for thy soul, I conjure and bind thee to titter unto me 
7vhat I shall ask thee. 
Then cutting down the Carcass from the tree, lay his head towards 
the East, and in the space that this following Conjuration is repeating, 
set a Chafing-dish of fire at his right hand, into which powre a little 
Wine, some Mastick, and.Gum Aromatick, and lastly a viol full of the 
sweetest Oyl, having also a pair of Bellows, and some unkindled Char- 
cole to make the fire burn bi-ight at the instant of the Carcass's rising. 
The Conjuration is this : 
/ conjure thee thou spirit of N. that thou do immediately enter into 
thy antient body again, and answer to my demands, by the virtue of 
the holy resurrection, and by the posture of the body of the Saviour of 
the world, I charge thee, I conjure thee, I command fhee on pain of 
the tormetits and wandring of thrice seven years, which I by the 
power of sacred Magic k rites, have power to inflict upon thee ; by 
thy sighs atid groans, I conjure thee to utter thy voice ; sa help thee 
God and the prayers of the holy Church. Amen. 
Which Conjuration being thrice repeated while the fire is burning 
with Mastick and Gum Aromatick, the body will begin to rise, and at 
last will stand upright before the Exorcist, answering with a faint and 
hollow voice, the questions proposed unto it. Why it strangled it self ; 
where its dwelling is ; what its food and life is ; how long it will be 
ere it enter into rest, and by what means the Magitian may assist it to 
come to rest : Also, of the treasures of this world, where they are 
hid : Moreover, it can answer very punctually of the places where 
Ghosts reside, and how to communicate with them; teaching the nature 
of As 1 Spirits and hellish beings, so far as its capacity reacheth. 
All which when the Ghost hath fully answered, the Magitian ought 
out of commiseration and reverence to the deceased, to use what 
means can possibly be used for the procuring rest unto the Spirit.

--- PAGE 573 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. hi. 475 
To which effect he must dig a grave, and filling the same half full of 
quick Lime, and a little Salt and common Sulphur, put the Carcass 
naked into the same ; which experiment, next to the burning of the 
body into ashes, is of great force to quiet and end the disturbance of 
the Astral Spirit. 
But if the Ghost with whom the Exorcist consulteth, be of one that 
dyed the common death, and obtain'd the ceremonies of burial, the 
body must be dig'd out of the ground at 12 a clock at night ; and the 
Magician must have a com/panion with him, who beareth a torch in 218. 
his left hand, and smiting the Corps thrice with the consecrated rod, 
the Exorcist must turn himself to all the four winds, saying : 
By the virtue of the holy resurrection, and the torments of the damned, Another form. 
I conjure atid exorcize thee spirit of N. deceased, to answer my liege 
demands, being obedietit unto these sacred ceremonies on pai?i of ever- 
lasting torment and distress : Then let him say, i3cra!&, ISffoaltr, 
JSalbin gab gaior agafia; Arise, arise, I charge and command thee. 
After which Ceremonies, let him ask what he desireth and he shall 
be answered. 
But as a faithful caution to the practicer of this Art, I shall con- A Caution for 
elude with this. That if the Magician, by the Constellation and Position ^"^^ E.\orcist. 
of the Stars at his nativity, be in the predicament of those that follow 
Magical Arts, it will be very dangerous to try this experiment for fear 
of suddain death ensuing, which the Ghosts of men deceased, can 
easily effect upon those whose nativities lead them to Conjuration : 
And which suddain and violent death, the Stars do alwayes promise 
to such as they mark with the Stigma of Magicians. 
Chap. III. 
How to raise up the three Spirits, Paymon, Bathin, and Barma .• 
And what wonderficl things may be effected through their 
assistance. 
He Spirit Paymon is of the power of the Air, the sixteenth in Their order, 
the ranck of Thrones, subordinate to Corban and Marbas. 
Bathin is of a deeper reach in the source of the fire, the 
second after Lucifers familiar, and hath not his fellow for agility 
and affableness, in the whole Infernal Hierarchy. 
Barma is a mighty Potentate of the order of Seraphims, whom 20 
Legions of Infernal Spirits do obey ; his property is to metamorphose

--- PAGE 574 ---
476 
Book XV. The Discovevy 
The Utensils 
to be used. 
The Circle. 
219, 
The Consecra- 
tion. 
[* iransp. it,J 
The Conjura- 
tion. 
the Magician or whom he pleaseth, and transport into foreign 
Countreys. 
These three Spirits, though of various ranks and orders, are all 
of one power, ability and nature, and the form of raising them 
all is one. Therefore the Magician that desireth to consult with 
either of these Spirits, must appoint a night in the waxing of the 
Moon, wherein the Planet Mercury reigns, at ii a clock at night ; 
not joyning to himself any companion, because this particular action 
will admit of none ; and for the space of four dayes before the 
appointed night, he ought every morning to shave his beard, and shift 
himself with clean linnen, providing beforehand the two Seals of the 
Earth, drawn exactly upon parchment, having also his consecrated 
Girdle ready of a black Cats skin with the hair on, and these names 
written on the inner side of the Girdle: S'a, ©a •1' '^if, ©libra 
<fflof)iin 4* Sattag ►J' 8?at) i3t(onag tuo robore ^ Cinchis sum 
Upon his Shooes must be written ffictragramntaton, with crosses 
round about, and his garment must be a Priestly Robe of black, with a 
Friers hood, and a Bible in his hand. 
When all these things are prepared, and the Exorcist hath lived 
chastly, and retired until rtie appointed time : Let him have ready a 
fair Parlour or Cellar, with every chink and window closed ; then 
lighting seven Candles, and drawing a double Circle with his own 
blood, which he must have ready before hand : let him divide the 
Circle into seven parts, and write these seven names at the seven 
divisions, setting at every Name a Candle lighted in a brazen Candle- 
stick in the space betwixt the Circles : The names are these, (ffaios ^ 
<!rsc^erie A anicft ^ sabhac S Sagun ^ ^ aba abalitiotfi A/ 
When the Candles are lighted, let the Magician being in the midst 
of the Circle, and supporting himself with two drawn Swords, say 
with a low and submissive voyce ; I do by the vertue of these seven 
holy Names which are the Lainps of the living God, Consecrate tmto 
my use this iticlosed Circle, and exter7ni7iate out of it* all evill Spirits, 
and their power ; that beyond the limit of their circumference they 
e7iter not on pain of tortnents to be dotcbled, galj, agioil, J^clior, 
Jl^fliga^, Amen. 
When this Consecration is ended, Let him sprinkle the Circle with 
consecrated Water, and with a Chafing-dish of Charcole, perfume it 
with Frankincense and Cinamon, laying the Swords a cross the Circle, 
and standing over them ; then whilest the fumigation burneth, let him 
begin to call these three Spirits in this following manner : 
/ Conjure and Exorcize you the three Gentle and Noble Spirits of 
the power of the North, by the great and dreadful name of dpfjail 
yoter King, and by the silence of the night, and by the holy rites of

--- PAGE 575 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. hi. 477 
Magick, and by the number of the Infernal Legions, I adjure and 
invocate you ; Thai without delay ye present your selves here before 
the Northern qtiarter of this Circle, all of you, or any one of you, and 
answer my deniands by the force of the words contained in this Book. 
This must be thrice repeated, and at the third repetition, the three 
Spirits will either all appear, or one by lot, if the other be already 
somewhere else imployed ; at their appearance they will send before 
them three fleet Hounds opening after a H are, who will run round 
the Circle for the space of half a quarter of an hour ; after that more 
hounds will come in, and after all, a little ugly ^thiop, who will take 
the Hare from their ravenous mouths, and together with the Hounds 
vanish ; at last the Magician shall hear the winding of a Hunts-mans 
horn, and a Herald on Horseback shall come galloping with three 
Hunters behind upon black Horses, who will compass the Circle 
seven times, and at the seventh time will make a stand at the Northern 
quarter, dismissing the Herald that came up before them, and turning 
their Horses towards the Magician, will stand all a brest before him, 
saying; <J?iI pragma burtjon macfiatan ftennat; to which the Magician 
must boldly answer; ISeral, 33eroaI&, CToratJ, IScrmtel ; By the sacred rites 
of Magick ye are welcome ye three famous Hunters of the North, and 
my command is, that by the power of these Ceremonies ye be obedient 
a7id faithful unto my suminons, unto which I conjure you by the holy 
Names of God, gaf), ©ian, Soter, ga^ , Je^ obaf), Bminanuel, Cetragfain= 
maton, ^aj, ia&onag, Sattag, Serap^in ; Bindittg afid obliging you to 
answer plainly, faithfully and truly, by all these holy names, and by 
the awful name of your mighty Kijtg ^peolpjon.* \:^sic] 
Which when the Magician hath said, the middle Hunter named TheCondiU- 
^lagnton, will answer, Oil pragma turtfion mactatan Dennaf), We are the 
three mighty Hunters of the North, in the Kittgdojn of Fiacim, and are 
come hither by the sotmd of thy Conjurations, to which we swear by him 
that liveth to yield obedience, Judas that betrayed him be not najned. 
Then shall the Magician swear. By hitn that liveth, and by all that The Magicians 
is contained in this holy Book, I swear unto you this night, and by the 
jnysteries of this actioft, I swear imto yoii this night, and by the bonds 
of darkness I swear unto you this night. That Judas the Traitor 
shall not be 7iamed, and that blood shall not be offered mtto you, but 
that truce and eqtial terms shall be observed betwixt us. Which being 
said, the Spirits will bow down their heads to the Horses crests, and 
then alighting down will call their Herald to withdraw their Horses ; 
which done, The Magician may begin to bargain with all, or any one 
of them, as a familiar invisibly to attend him, or to answer all difficul- 
ties that he propoundeth : Then may he begin to ask them of the 
frame of the World, and the Kingdoms therein contained, which are

--- PAGE 576 ---
478 
Book XV. The Discovevy 
unknown unto Geographers: He may also be informed of all Physical 
processes and operations ; also how to go invisible and fly through 
The girdle of the airy Region : They can likewise give unto him the powerful Girdle 
Victory. of Victory, teaching him how to compose and consecrate the same, 
221. which hath/ the force, being tyed about him, to make him conquer 
\i.e., 220.] Armies, and all men whatsoever. Besides, there is not any King or 
Emperour throughout the world ; but if he desires it, they will engage 
to bring him the most pretious of their Jewels and Riches in twenty 
four hours ; discovering also unto him the way of finding hidden 
treasures and the richest mines. 
The form of And after the Conjurer hath fulfilled his desires, he shall dismiss 
discharge. ^j^^ aforesaid Spirits in this following form. 
/ charge you ye three officiates Spirits to depart unto the place whence 
ye were called, without injury to either inati or Beast, leaving the ten- 
der Corn untouched, and the seed unbruised ; / dismiss you, and licence 
you to go back untill I call you, and to be alwayes ready at my desire, 
especially thou Jiimble ISat^tn, whom I have chosen to attend me, that 
thou be alwayes ready when I ring a little Bell to present thy self 
without any Magical Ceremonies performed ; and so depart ye from 
hence, and peace be betwixt you and us. In the Name of the Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost. Amen. 
When the Magician hath repeated this last form of dismission, he 
will hear immediately a horn winding, after which the Herald with 
the jet black Horses, and the three Spirits will mount upon them, 
compassing the Circle seven times, with the Herald winding his horn 
before them, and at every Candle they will bow towards the Horses 
crest, till coming towards the Northern quarter, they will with great 
obeysance seem to march away out through the solid wall as through 
a City gate. 
Chap. IV. 
How to Consecrate all manner of Circles, Fumigations, Fire, 
Magical Gannents, and Uteitsills. 
What things /'^ Onsecrations are related either to the person or the thing 
^'^crL'ted^ consecrated. The person is the Magitian himself, whose con- 
secration consisteth in Abstinence, Temperance, and holy 
Garments. The things consecrated are the Oyl, the Fire, the Water. 
The Fumigations consisting of oriental Gums and Spices ; the 
magical Sword, Pensils, Pens and Compasses, the measuring Rule

--- PAGE 577 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. iv. 479 
and waxen Tapers, the Pentacles, Periapts, Lamins, and Sigils, Vests, 
Caps, and Priestly Garments ; these are the materials to be con- 
secrated. 
The sacred Pentacles are as signs and charms for the binding of Pentacles. 
Evil Daemons, consisting of Characters and Names of the Superior 
order of the good Spirits opposite unto those evil ones whom the 
Magitian is about to Invocate : And of sacred Pictures, Images, and 
Mathematical Figures adapted to the names and natures of separated 
Substances whither good or evil. Now the form of Consecrating such 
Magical Pentacles is to name the vertue of the holy Names and 
Figures, their Antiquity and Institution with the intention of the 
Consecration purifying the Pentacle by consecrated fire, and waving 
the same over the flames thereof. 
When the Exorcist would consecrate Places or Utensils, Fire or Utensils. 
Water for magical uses, he must repeat the Consecration or Dedica- 
tion of Solomon the King at the building of the Temple, the Vision 
of Moses at the Bush, and the Spirit of the Lord on the tops of the 
Mulberry-trees, repeating also the sacrifice of it self being kindled ; 
the Fire upon Sodom, and the Water of Eternal Life : Wherein the 
Magitian must still remember to speak of the seven golden Candle- 
sticks, and Ezekiels Wheels, closing the Consecration with the deep 
and mysterious Names of God and holy Daemons. 
When particular Instruments are to be sanctified, the Magitian Instruments, 
must sprinkle the same with consecrated Water, and fumigate them 
with fumigations, anoint them with consecrated Oyl : And lastly. 
Seal them with holy/ Characters ; after all which is performed, an 221. 
Oration or Prayer must follow, relating the particulars of the Conse- 
cration with Petitions to that Power in whose Name and Authority 
the Ceremony is performed. 
And in like manner shalt thou consecrate and sanctifie every Howtoconse- 
Utensil whatsoever, by Sprinklings, Fumigations, Unctions, Seals, 
and Benedictions, commemorating and reiterating the sanctifyings in 
the holy Scripture, of the Tables of the Law delivered to Moses ; 
of the two Testaments in the New Covenant, of the holy Prophets 
in their Mothers wombs, and of Aholiah, and AJiolibah, whom the 
Spirit of God inspired to frame all sorts of curious workmanship for 
the Tabernacle. This is the sum of Consecrationn.* [«s,V]

--- PAGE 578 ---
48o 
Book XV. 
The Discovery 
Chap. V. 
Circles how to 
be made. 
Fumigations. 
Treating more practically of the Consecration of Circles, Fires, 
Garments, and Ftimigations. 
IN 
the Construction of Magical Circles, the hour, day, or night, 
and season of the year, and the Constellation are to be con- 
sidered; as also what sort of Spirits are to be called; and to what 
Region, Air, or Climate they belong : Therefore this method is to be 
followed for the more orderly and certain proceeding therein. First, 
a Circle nine foot over must be drawn, within which another Circle 
three inches from the outermost must be also made, in the Center 
whereof the name of the hour, the Angel of the hour, the Seal of the 
Angel, the Angel of the day predominant, wherein the work is under- 
taken. Note, these attributes are to be inscribed betwixt the Circles 
round about v^'wh Alpha at the beginning, and Omega at the close. 
When the Circle is composed, it must be sprinkled with holy 
Water, while the Magician saith. Wash me O Lord, and I shall be 
whiter then Snow : And as for the Fumigations over them, this Bene- 
diction must be said ; O God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, bless 
these thy subservient creatures, that they may tmiltiply the force of 
their excellent odors, to hinder evil spirits and phantasms from entring 
the Circle, through our Lord. Atnen. 
An Exorcism for the fire. 
The Exorcist ought to have an earthen Censer, wherein to preserve 
the fire for magical uses, and the expiations and fumigations, whose 
consecration is on this manner. 
By him that created Heaven and Earth, and is the God and Lord 
of all, I exorcize and sanctifie thee thoti creature of Fire, that imme- 
diately thou banish every phantasm from thee, so that thou prove not 
hurtful in any kind : Which I beseech thee O Lord to confirm by 
sanctifying and making pure this creature of fire, that it may be blessed 
and consecrate to the honour of thy holy Name. Amen. 
At the putting on the Gartnents, 
Garments. 
Let the Magician say, By the figurative mystery of this holy Stole 
or Vestment, I will cloath me with the artnour of Salvation in

--- PAGE 579 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. VI. 
the strength of the highest, aiicor, amacor, ^tnilits, Cfjeolronias, anitor. 
That my desired end may be effected throtigh thy strength Slioiiai, to 
whom the praise and glory will for ever belong. 
Which Ceremonies being finished, the Exorcist shall proceed to Practice, 
the practical part of Invocation and Conjuration of all degrees of 
Spirits, having every utensil and appendix in readiness for the per- 
formance, and proceeding according to the method in these following 
Chapters. 
Chap. VI. 222.. 
How to raise and exorcize all sorts of Spirits belonging to the 
Airy Region. 
T 
He Garment which the Exorcist is cloathed withall at the What sort of 
^ . , . . , ,. , . . Garments must 
performance of this action, ought according to the opinions be used, 
of the chiefest Magicians, to be a Priestly Robe, which if it 
can no where be procured, may be a neat and cleanly linnen Vest, 
with the holy Pentacle fastned thereunto upon Parchment made 
of a Kids skin, over which an Invocation must be said, and then 
the Pentacle must be sprinkled with holy Water. At the putting 
on the Magical Garment, this Prayer must be repeated : By thy 
holy power Sttoitai Sataotf), And by the power and jnerit of thine 
Angels and Archangels, and by the verttie of holy Church, which thou 
hast sanctified, do I cloath me with this consecrated Gartttent, that 
what I am to practice may take effect through thy Name who art 
for ever and ever. 
Now as for the time of operation, and the manner thereof, The The manner of 
Instructions before set down, are sufficient to direct the Exorcist ; c°"i"""g- 
only the Acter and his Scholar must be mindful in the way, as they 
go towards the place of Conjuration, to reiterate the sacred forms of 
Consecrations, Prayers, and Invocations, the one bearing an Earthen 
Vessel with consecrated fire, and the other the Magical Sword, the 
Book and Garments, till approaching nigh the place where the Circle 
is to be drawn, they must then proceed to compose it after the aforesaid 
manner. And at last Exorcize the Spirits on this following manner : 
Seei}ig God hath given us the power to bruise the Serpents head. The form. 
and command the Prince of Darkness, much more to bear rule over 
every airy Spirit : Therefore by his strong and mighty Name 
i>ef)oba1) do I conjure you, (naming the Spirits), and by his secret com- 
mands delivered to Moses on the Mount, and by his holy Name 
3Q

--- PAGE 580 ---
482 
Book XV. 
The Discovery 
The Appariti- 
ons. 
What these 
Spirits can do. 
223. 
An example of 
their power. 
How to dismiss 
them. 
CTf tragrammaton, and by all his wonderful Names and Attributes^ Saiiat, 
©Hon, <ffmillaf(, saifiaiiafos. iPavarletos, &c. That ye do here immediately 
appear before this Circle, in humane form, and not terrible or of tnon- 
strous shape, on paiti of eternal }nisery that abides you, unless you 
speedily fulf I my commands, ISatfiar, 13altar, iarc^im, anabtm, §Lakm. 
Ame7i. 
When the Exorcist hath finished this Conjuration, he and his 
companion shall continue constantly turning themselves to the East, 
West, North and South, saying, with their Caps in their hands, 
©evson. anrfe, iarpfiaton, UasannaJ, Cabon ; and within a little space 
they will behold various apparitions upon the ground, and in the air, 
with various habits, shapes, and instruments ; after that, he shall 
perceive a troop of armed men with threatning carriage appear before 
the Circle, who after they are conjured to leave off their phantasms, 
will at last present themselves before the Exorcist in humane form. 
Then the Master must be mindful to take the consecrated Sword, 
and the cup of Wine into his hands ; the Wine he shall pour into the 
fire, and the Sword he shall brandish in his right arm, being girded 
about with a Scarlet Ribbon ; after this the Magician shall say, 
(iSaJirc, ffiep^na, '^nt^^txaXm ; then the Spirits will begin to bow unto 
the Exorcist, saying. We are ready to fulfil thy pleasure. 
So that when the Magician hath brought the Spirits to this length, 
he may ask what ever he desireth, and they will answer him, provided 
the questions belong to that order whereof they are. 
Now the properties wherein they excel, are these ; They can give 
the gift of Invisibility, and the fore-knowledge of the change of 
weather ; they can teach the Exorcist how to excite Storms and Tem- 
pests, and how to calm them again ; they can bring news in an hours 
space of the success of any Battle, Seidge, or Navy, how farr off