ath no life. If the voice doo it, then may it be doone by any beasts 
or birds. If words, then a parret may doo it. If in mans words 
onlie, where is the/ force, in the first, second, or third syllable 1 If 448. 
in syllables, then not in words. If in imaginations, then the divell 
knoweth our thoughts. But all this stuffe is vaine and fabulous. 
It is written ; All the generations of the earth were healthfull, and Sap. 1. 14. 
there is no poison of destruction in them. Why then doo they con- Cen.*^!'. ^ 
jure holsome creatures ; as salt, water, &c : where no divels are ? 
God looked upon all his works, and sawe they were all good. What Act- "9- 
effect (I praie you) had the 7. sonnes of Sceva ; which is the great 
3 c

--- PAGE 476 ---
37« 
. Booke. 
TJic discoverie 
Mark i6. 17. 
324. 
« Isai. 43. II. 
^ verse. 13. 
cap. 44. 
verse. 7. 
verse. 25. 
Isai. 46. 10. 
cap. 47. vers. 
12. 13, &c. 
Luke. II. 20. 
Matt. 12. 28. 
Acts, 8. 19. 
449- 
objection of witchmongers } They would needs take upon them to 
conjure divels out of the possessed. But what brought they to passe? 
Yet that was in the time, whilest God suffered miracles commonlie to 
be wrought. By that you may see what conjurors can doo. 
Where is such a promise to conjurors or witches, as is made in the 
Gospell to the faithful!? where it is written ; In my name they shall 
cast/ out divels, speake with new toongs : if they shall drinke any 
deadlie thing, it shall not hurt them ; they shall take awaie serpents, 
they shall laie hands on the sicke, and they shall recover. According 
to the promise, this grant of miraculous working was performed in 
the primitive church, for the confirmation of Christs doctrine, and 
the establishing of the Gospell. 
But as in another place I have prooved, the gift thereof was but 
for a time, and is now ceased ; neither was it ever made to papist, 
witch, or conjuror. They take upon them to call up and cast out 
divels ; and to undoo with one divell, that which another divell hath 
doone. If one divell could cast out another, it were a kingdome 
divided, and could not stand. Which argument Christ himselfe 
maketh : and therfore I male the more boldlie saie even with Christ, 
that they have no such power. For ^besides him, there is no saviour, 
none can deliver out of his hand. Who but hee can declare, set in 
order, appoint, and tell what is to come? He destroieth the tokens 
of soothsaiers, and maketh the conjecturers fooles, &c. He declareth 
things to come, and so cannot witches. 
There is no heipe in inchanters and soothsaiers, and other such 
vaine sciences. For divels are cast out by the finger of God, which 
Matthew calleth the spirit of God, which is the mightie power of 
God, and not by the vertue of the bare name onelie, being spoken 
or pronounced : for then might everie wicked man/ doo it. And 
Simon Magtis needed not then to have proffered monie to have 
bought the power to doo miracles and woonders : for he could 
speake and pronounce the name of God, as well as the apostles. In- 
deed they male soone throwe out all the divels that are in frankin- 
cense, and such like creatures, wherein no divels are : but neither 
they, nor all their holie water can indeed cure a man possessed with 
a divell, either in bodie or mind ; as Christ did. Naie, why doo they 
not cast out the divell that possesseth their owne soules ? 
Let me heare anie of them' all speake with new toongs, let them 
drinke but one dramme of a potion which I will prepare for them, let 
them cure the sicke by laieng on of hands (though witches take it 
upon them, and witchmongers beleeve it) and then I will subscribe 
unto them. But if they, which repose such certeintie in the actions 
of witches and conjurors, would diligentlie note their deceipt, and

--- PAGE 477 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 30. 3J9 
how the scope whereat they shoote is monie (I meane not such Monieis 
witches as are falselie accused, but such as take upon them to give "^^^^^^ 
answers, «S:c : as mother Btttigie did) they should apparentlie see the ^'"j^?^^ 
cousenage. For they are abused, as are manie beholders of jugglers, rors doo 
which suppose they doo miraculouslie, that which is doone by slight 
and subtiltie. 
But in this matter of witchcrafts and conjurations, if men would 
rather trust their owne eies, than old wives tales and lies, I dare 
undertake this matter would soone be at a perfect point ; as being 
easier to be perceived than jugghng. But I must needs confesse, 
that it is no great mar\ ell, though the simple be abused therein, when 
such lies concerning those matters are mainteined by such persons of 
account, and thrust into their divine service. As for example :/ It is 325. 
written that S. Mariine thrust his fingers into ones mouth that had a s. Manins 
divell within him, and used to bite folke ; and then did bid him 
devoure them if he could. And bicause the divell could not get out Martini. 
at his mouth, being stopt with S. Martins fingers, he was faine to ' 
run out at his fundament. O stinking lie ! / 
The XXX. Chapter. 
That it is a shame for papists to beleeve other conjurors dooings, 
their owne being of so title force, Hipocrates his opinion 
herein. 
450. 
XD still me thinks papists (of all others) which indeed 
are most credulous, and doo most mainteine the force of 
witches charmes, and of conjurors cousenages, should 
perceive and judge conjurors dooings to be void of effect. 
For when they see their owne stuffe, as holie water, salt, candles, Sac: 
conjured by their holie bishop and preests ; & that in the words of 
consecration or conjuration (for so* their owne doctors terme them) * To wit, 
they adjure the water, iScc : to heale, not onelie the soules infirmitie, ^"^i^J'ifai- 
but also everie maladie, hurt, or ach of the bodie ; and doo also com- ^p^J'^^^ 
mand the candles, with the force of all their authoritie and power, 
and by the effect of all their holie words, not to consume : and yet 
neither soule nor bodie anie thing recover, nor the candles last one 
minute the longer : with what face can they defend the others mira- 
culous workes ; as though the witches and conjurors actions were 
more effectuall than their owne ? Hippocrates being but a heathen, 
and not having the perfect knowledge of God, could see and perceive 
Durand. de 
exorcist.

--- PAGE 478 ---
380 15 Booke. TJie discoverie 
their cousenage and knaverie well enough, who saith ; They which 
boast so, that they can remoove or helpe the infections of diseases, with 
sacrifices, conjurations, or other magicall instruments or meanes, are 
but needie fellowes, wanting living ; and therefore referre their words 
to the divell : bicause they would seeme to know somewhat more 
than the common people. It is marvell that papists doo affirme, that 
their holie water, crosses, or bugges words have such vertue and 
violence, as to drive awaie divels : so as they dare not approch to 
anie place or person besmeered with such stuffe ; when as it appeareth 
in the gospell, that the divell presumed to assault and tempt Christ 
^j/. himselfe. For the divell indeed most ernestlie busieth him/selfe 
to seduce the godlie : as for the wicked, he maketh reckoning and 
just accompt of them, as of his owne alreadie. But let us go forward 
in our refutation./ 
326. 
The xxxi. Chapter. 
[* See p. 7/7.; 
A fowle of- 
fense 10 
backbite 
y« absent, 
& to bee- 
He the 
dead. 
Acts. 19. 
[t ? Pomonce'i 
Just. lib. 16. 
How conjurors have beguiled witches, what bookes they carie 
about to procure credit to their art, wicked assertions against 
Moses and Joseph. 
HUS you see that conjurors are no small fooles. For 
whereas witches being poore and needie, go from doore 
to doore for releefe, have they never so manie todes or 
cats at home, or never so much hogs doong and charvill* 
about them, or never so manie charmes in store : these conjurors (I 
saie) have gotten them offices in the church of Ro7ne, wherby they 
have obteined authoritie & great estimation. And further, to adde 
credit to that art, these conjurors carrie about at this daie, bookes 
intituled under the names of Adam, Abel, Tobie, & Enoch ; which 
Enoch they repute the most divine fellow in such matters. They 
have also among them bookes that they saie Abraham, Aaro7i and 
Salomon made. Item they have bookes of Zacharie, Paule, Honorius, 
Cypriaji, Jero?ne, Jeremie, Albert, and Thomas : also of the angels, 
Riziel, Razael, and Raphael ; and these doubtlesse were such bookes 
as were said to have beene burnt in the lesser Asia. And for their 
further credit they boast, that they must be and are skilfull and learned 
in these arts ; to wit, Ars Almadell, ars Notoria, ars Bulaphice, ars 
Arthephii, ars Pomena,\ ars Revelationis, Ss^c. Yea, these conjurors 
in corners sticke not (with Justine') to report and affirme, that Joseph, 
who was a true figure of Christ that delivered and redeemed us, was

--- PAGE 479 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 32. ^8 I 
learned in these arts, and thereby prophesied and expounded dreames: 
and that those arts came from him to Moses, and finallie from Moses 
to them : which thing both Plinie and Tacitus affirme of Moses. Also PUn. lib. 30. ■ 
Strabo in his cosmographie maketh the verie like blasphemous sttitb' lib. 16. 
report. And likewise Apolloiiiiisj Alolon, Possidonms, Lisimachus, 
and Appian terme Moses both a magician and a conjuror : whom 
Eusebius confuteth with manie notable arguments. For Moses 
differed as much from a magician, as truth from falshood, and pietie 
from vanitie : for in truth, he confounded all magicke, and made the 
world see, and the cunningest magicians of the earth confesse, that 
their owne dooings were but illusions, and that his miracles were 
wrought by the finger of God. But that the poore old witches know- 
ledge reacheth thus farre (as Dancetis affirmeth it dooth) is untrue : fj^"^"^gfi'^' 
for their furthest fetches that I can comprehend, are but to fetch a ariis. 
pot of milke, &c : from their neighbors house, halfe a mile distant 
from them./ 
The xxxii. Chapter. 327. 
A// jnagicall arts co7ifttted by an argument cojicerning Nero, 
what Cornelius Agrippa and Carolus Gallus have left written 
thereof, aiid prooved by experience. 
URELIE Nero prooved all these magicall arts to be 
vaine and fabulous lies, and nothing but cousenage and 
knaverie. He was a notable prince, having gifts of 
nature enow to have conceived such matters, treasure 
enough to have emploied in the search thereof, he made no conscience 
therein, he had singular conferences thereabout ; he offered, and 
would have given halfe his kingdome to have learned those things, 
which he heard might be wrought by magicians ; he procured all 
the cunning magicians in the world to come to Rome, he searched 
for bookes also, and all other things necessarie for a magician ; and xiridates 
never could find anie thing in it, but cousenage and legierdemaine. '^'^ 
At length he met with one Tiridates, the great magician, who having biddeth 
with him all his companions, and fellowe magicians, witches, con- rorNero 
jurors, and couseners, invited Nero to certeine magicall bankets and 
exercises. Which when Nero required to learne,/ he (to hide his ^jj. 
cousenage) answered that he would not, nor could not teach him, 
though he would have given him his kingdome. The matter of his 
refusall (I saie) was, least Nero should espie the cousening devises 
thereof Which when Nero conceived, and sawe the same, and all

--- PAGE 480 ---
382 15. Booke. The discoverie 
Nero made ^j^g residue of that art to be vaine, lieng and ridiculous, having onelie 
gainst con- shadowes of truth, and that their arts were onelie veneficall ; he pro- 
conjura-"'' hibitcd the same utterlie, and made good and strong lawes against 
''0"s. the use and the practisers thereof : as Plinie and others doo report. It 
is marvell that anie man can be so much abused, as to suppose that 
sathan may be commanded, compelled, or tied by the power of man : 
as though the divell would yeeld to man, beyond nature ; that will 
not yeeld to God his creator, according to the rules of nature. And 
in so much as there be (as they confesse) good angels as well as bad; 
I would know whie they call up the angels of hell, and not call downe 
C.Agrif.iib. the angels of heaven. But this they answer (as AgriMa saith.) 
devanitat. ^ , , /r 1 n i 1 n- 11, 
scient. Good angcls (lorsoothj doo hardlie appeare, and the other are readie 
at hand. Here I may not omit to tell you how Cor. Agrippa be- 
wraieth, detecteth, and defaceth this art of conjuration, who in his 
youth travelled into the bottome of all these magicall sciences, and 
was not onelie a great conjuror and practiser thereof, but also wrote 
cunninglie De occtclta philosophia. Howbeit, afterwards in his wiser 
age, he recanteth his opinions, and lamenteth his follies in that be- 
halfe, and discovereth the impietie and vanities of magicians, and 
inchanters, which boast they can doo miracles : which action is now 
ceased (saith he) and assigneth them a place with Jannes and Jambres, 
affirming that this art teacheth nothing but vaine toies for a shew. 
Carolus Callus also saith ; I have tried oftentimes, by the witches 
and conjurors themselves, that their arts (especiallie those which doo 
328. consist of charmes, impossibilities,/ conjurations, and witchcrafts, 
whereof they were woont to boast) to be meere foolishnes, doting lies, 
and dreames. I for my part can sale as much, but that I delight not 
to alledge mine owne proofes and authorities ; for that mine adver- 
saries will saie they are parciall, and not indifferent./ 
454- 
The xxxiii. Chapter. 
0/ Salomons conjurations, and of the opinion conceived of his 
cunning and practise therein. 
iT is affirmed by sundrie authors, that Salomon was the 
I first inventor of those conjurations; and thereof fosephus 
is the first reporter, who in his fift booke De fudceorum 
: antiquitatibus, cap. 22. rehearseth soberliethis storie follow- 
ing ; which Polydore Virgil, and manie other repeat verbatim, in this 
wise, and seeme to credit the fable, whereof there is skant a true word.

--- PAGE 481 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 33. 383 
Salomon was the greatest philosopher, and did philosophie about 
all things, and had the full and perfect knowlege of all their pro- 
prieties : but he had that gift given from above to him, for the profit 
and health of mankind : which is effectuall against divels. He made 
also inchantments, wherewith diseases are driven awaie ; and left 
diverse maners of conjurations written, whereunto the divels giving 
place are so driven awaie, that they never returne. And this kind of 
healing is very common among my countrimen : for I sawe a neigh- 
bour of mine, one Eleazer, that in the presence of Vespasian and his Probatum 
sonnes, and the rest of the souldiers, cured many that were possessed est^^ona. 
with spirits. The maner and order of his cure was this. He did fore^witnps: 
put unto the nose of the possessed a ring, under the scale wherof was "° 
inclosed a kind of roote, whose verture Salomon declared, and the 
savour thereof drewe the divell out at his nose ; so as downe fell the 
man, and then Eleazer conjured the divell to depart, & to return no 
more to him. In the meane time he made mention of Salomon, 
reciting incantations of Salomo7is owne making. And then Eleazer 
being willing to shew the standers by his cunning, and the wonderfuU 
efficacie of his art, did set not farre from thence, a pot or basen full 
of water, & commanded the divell that went out of the man, that by 
the overthrowing thereof, he would give a signe to the beholders, that 
he had utterlie forsaken and leaft the man./ Which thing being doone, 453. 
none there doubted how great Salomons knowledge and wisedome 
was. Wherin a jugling knacke was produced, to confirme a cogging 
cast of knaverie or cousenage. 
Another storie of Salomons conjuration I find cited in the sixt 
lesson, read in the church of Rome upon S. Margarets dale, far more 
ridiculous than this. Also Peter Lombard maister of the sentences, . .. ■ . . 
' Lib. 4 aist. 14 
and Gratian his brother, the compiler of the golden decrees ; and Decret. au- 
Durandus'xn h.\s Rationale divi7torum, doo all soberlie affirmeSalojnons g^b^'Ji'fx-'' 
cunning in this behalfe ; and speciallie this tale ; to wit, that Salojnon orcist. 
inclosed certeine thousand di/vels in a brasen bowle, and left it in a 329. 
deepe hole or lake, so as afterwards the Babylonians found it, and 
supposing there had beene gold or silver therein, brake it, and out flew 
all the divels, &c. And that this fable is of credit, you shall perceive, 
in that it is thought woorthie to be read in the Romish church as par- 
cell of their divine service. Looke in the lessons of S. Margarets ^^^^ ^ ^ g 
dale the virgine, and you shall find these words verbatim : which I 
the rather recite, bicause it serveth me for divers turnes ; to wit, for 
Salomons conjurations, for the tale of the brasen vessell, and for the 
popes conjurations, which extended both to faith and doctrine, and to 
shew of what credit their religion is, that so shamefuUie is stained 
with lies and fables.

--- PAGE 482 ---
384 is.Bookf. TJie discoverie 
The xxxiiii. Chapter. 
Lect. in die 
sanctissiviie 
Marg. vir. 5. 
Lect. 6. 
Looke in 
the word 
lidoni, 
pag, 383. 
* For the 
preests pro- 
fit, I war- 
rant you. 
This is co- 
mon (they 
saie) when 
a witch or 
conjuror 
dieth. 
330. 
Lessons read in all churches, where (he pope hath authorities 
on S. Margarets daie, translated into English word for 
word. 
OLIE Margaret required of GOD, that she might have 
a conflict face to face with hir secret enimie the divell ; 
and rising from praier, she sawe a terrible dragon, that 
would have devoured hir, but she made the signe of the 
crosse, and the dragon burst in the middest. 
Afterwards, she sawe another man/ sitting like a Niger, having his 
hands bound fast to his knees, she taking him by the haire of the head, 
threw him to the ground, and set hir foote on his head ; and hir 
praiers being made, a light shined from heaven into the prison where 
she was, and the crosse of Christ was seene in heaven, with a doove 
sitting thereon, who said ; Blessed art thou O Margaret, the gates of 
paradise attend thy comming. Then she giving thanks to God, said 
to the divell. Declare to me thy name. The divell said ; Take awaie 
thy foote from my head, that I may be able to speake, and tell thee : 
which being done, the divell said, I am Veltis, one of them whome 
Salomon shut in the brasen vessel!, and the Babylonians comming, 
and supposing there had beene gold therein, brake the vessell, and 
then we flew out : ever since lieng in wait to annoie the just. But 
seeing I have recited a part of hir storie, you shall also have the 
end therof : for at the time of hir execution this was hir praier 
following. 
Grant therefore O father, that whosoever writeth, readeth, or heareth 
my passion, or maketh memoriall of me, may deserve pardon for all his 
sinnes : whosoever calleth on me, being at the point of death, deliver 
him out of the hands of his adversaries. And I also require, O Lord, 
that whosoever shall build a church in the honor of me, or ministreth 
unto me anie candles* of his just labour, let him obteine whatsoever 
he asketh for his health. Deliver all women in travell that call upon 
me, from the danger thereof. 
Hir praier ended, there were manie great thunderclaps, and a doove 
came downe from heaven, saieng ; Blessed art thou O Margaret the 
spouse of Christ. Such things as thou hast asked, are granted unto thee; 
there/fore come thou into everlasting rest, &c. Then the hangman 
(though she did bid him) refused to cut off hir head : to whome she 
said ; Except thou doo it, thou canst have no part with me, and then 
lo he did it, &c. But sithens I have beene, and must be tedious, I

--- PAGE 483 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 35. 385 
thought good to refresh my reader with a lamentable storie, depend- 
ing upon the matter precedent, reported by manie grave authors, word 
for word, in maner and forme following. / 
The XXXV. Chapter. 
457- 
A delicate storie of a Lombard, who by S. Margarets example 
would needs fight with a reall divell. 
HERE was (after a sermon made, wherein this storie of 
S. Margaret was recited, for in such stuffe consisted 
not onelie their service, but also their sermons in the 
blind time of poperie :) there was (I sale) a certeine 
yoong man, being a Lombard, whose simplicitie was such, as he 
had no respect unto the commoditie of worldlie things, but did 
altogither affect the salvation of his soule, who hearing how great 
S. Margarets triumph was, began to consider with himselfe, how Kakozeiia. 
full of slights the divell was. And among other things thus he 
said ; Oh that God would suffer, that the divell might fight with me 
hand to hand in visible forme ! I would then surelie in like maner 
overthrow him, and would fight with him till I had the victorie. And 
therefore about the twelfe houre he went out of the towne, and finding 
a convenient place where to praie, secretlie kneeling on his knees, he 
praied among other things, that God would suffer the divell to appeare 
unto him in visible forme, that according to the example of S. 
Margaret, he might overcome him in battell. And as he was in the 
middest of his praiers, there came into that place a woman with a 
hooke in hir hand, to gather certeine hearbs which grew there, who 
was dumme borne. And when she came into the place, and saw the Mutuaii 
yoong man among the hearbs on his knees, she was afraid, and waxed ^eanei' 
pale, and going backe, she rored in such sort, as hir voice could not of sudden 
be understood, and with hir head and fists made threatning signes 
unto him. The yoong man seeing such an ilfavoured fowle queane, 
that was for age decrepit and full of wrinkles, with a long bodie, 
leane of face, pale of colour, with ragged cloathes, crieng verie lowd, 
and having a voice not understandable, threatning him with the 
hooke which she carried in hir hand, he thought surehe she had 
beene no woman, but a divell appea/ring unto him in the shape of a 458. 
woman, and thought God had heard his praiers. For the which 
causes he fell upon hir lustilie, and at length threw hir downe to the 
ground, saieng ; Art thou come thou curssed divell, art thou come ? 
No no, thou shalt not overthrow me in visible fight, whome thou 
hast often overcome in invisible temptation.

--- PAGE 484 ---
;86 
15. BooUe. 
TJie discoverie 
S. Vincent 
raiseth the 
dead wo- 
man to life. 
S. Vincent 
niaketh the 
dambe to 
speake. 
Disl. 8. ey 
empl. 17. 
serm. 59. 
cap. so. 
And as he spake these words, he caught hir by the haire, and drew 
hir about, beating hir sometimes with his hands, sometimes with his 
heeles, and sometimes with the hooke so long, and wounded hir so 
331. sore, that he/ left hir a dieng. At the noise whereof manie people 
came running unto them, and seeing what was doone, they appre- 
hended the yoong man, and thrust him into a vile prison. S. Vinceftt 
by vertue of his holines understanding all this matter, caused the 
bodie that seemed dead to be brought unto him, and thereupon 
(according to his maner) he laid his hand upon hir, who immediatlie 
revived, and he called one of his chaplines to heare hir confession. 
But they that were present said to the man of God, that it were 
altogether in vaine so to doo, for that she had beene from hir 
nativitie dumbe, and could neither heare nor understand the priest, 
neither could in words confesse hir sinnes. Notwithstanding, S. 
Vinceni bad the priest heare hir confession, affirming that she should 
verie distinctlie speake all things unto him. And therfore, whatso- 
ever the man of God commanded, the priest did confidentlie 
accomplish and obeie : and as soone as the priest approched unto 
hir, to heare hir confession, she, whome all Cathalotiia knew to be 
dumbe borne, spake, and confessed hir selfe, pronouncing everie 
word as distinctlie, as though she had never beene dumbe. After hir 
confession she required the eucharist and extreame unction to be 
ministred unto hir, and at length she commended hir selfe to God ; 
and in the presence of all that came to see that miracle, she spake as 
long as she had anie breath in hir bodie. The yoong man that killed 
hir being saved from the gallowes by S. Vincents meanes, and at his 
intercession, departed home into Italie. This storie last rehearsed 
is found in Speado exe7nplonan, and repeated also by Robert 
Carociil : bishop of Aquinas, and manie others, and preached 
publikelie in the church of Rome. I 
459- 
The xxxvi. Chapter. 
The storie of Saint Margaret prooved to be both ridiculous and 
i7npious in everie point. ■ 
IRST, that the storie of S. Margaret is a fable, may be 
prooved by the incredible, impossible, f