h (saith Paule) of men, another flesh of beasts, i. Cor. 15, 39. 
another of fishes, another of birds. And therefore it is absolutelie 
against the ordinance of God (who hath made me a man) that I should 
flie like a bird, or swim like a fish, or creepe like a worme, or become 
an asse in shape: insomuch as if God would give me leave, I cannot 
doo it; for it were contrarie to his owne order and decree, and to the 
constitution of anie bodie which he hath made. Yea the spirits them- Psai. 119.

--- PAGE 178 ---
8o 
5. Booke. 
The discoverie 
I. Cor. 6, 19 
verse. 15, b'Q 
verse. 2. 
verse. 13. 
77. 
lOI. 
Psalm. 8. 
verses 5, 6, 7, 8. 
[•Rom.] 
selves have their lawes and limits prescribed, beyond the which they 
cannot passe one haires breadth; otherwise God should be contrarie 
to himselfe: which is farre from him. Neither is Gods omnipotencie 
hereby qualified, but the divels impotencie manifested, who hath none 
other power, but that which God from the beginning hath appointed 
unto him, consonant to his nature and substance. He may well be 
restreined from his power and will, but beyond the same he cannot 
passe, as being Gods minister, no further but in that which he hath 
from the beginning enabled him to doo: which is, that he being a 
spirit, may with Gods leave and ordinance viciat and corrupt the spirit 
and will of man : wherein he is verie diligent. 
What a beastlie assertion is it, that a man, whom GOD hath made 
according to his owne similitude and likenes, should be by a witch 
turned into a beast 1 What an impietie is it to affirme, that an asses 
bodie is the temple of the Holy-ghost ? Or an asse to be the child of 
God, and God to be his father ; as it is said of man ? Which Paule 
to the Cori7ithia7ts so divinelie confuteth, who saith, that Our bodies 
are the members of Christ. In the which we are toglorifie God: for 
the bodie is for the Lord, and the Lord is for the bodie. Surelie he 
meaneth not for an asses bodie, as by this time I hope appeareth: in 
such wise as Bodin may go hide him for / shame; especiallie when he 
shall understand, that even into these our bodies, which God hath 
framed after his owne like/nesse, he hath also brethed that spirit, which 
Bodin saith is now remaining within an asses bodie, which God hath 
so subjected in such servilitie under the foote of man; Of whom God is 
so mindfull, that he hath made him little lower than angels, yea than 
himselfe, and crowned him with glorie and worship, and made him to 
have dominion over the workes of his hands, as having put all things 
under his feete, all sheepe and oxen, yea woolves, asses, and all other 
beasts of the field, the foules of the aire, the fishes of the sea, &c. 
Bodins poet, Ovid, whose Metamorphosis make so much for him, 
saith to the overthrow of this phantasticall imagination : 
Os homini sublime dedit, ccehimqtie videre 
Jussit, erectos ad sydera tollere vulttes. 
The efifect of which verses is this ; 
* The Lord did set mans face so hie, 
That he the heavens might behold^ 
And looke up to the starrie skie. 
To see his woonders tnanifold. 
Now, if a witch or a divell can so alter the shape of a man, as con- 
trarilie to make him looke downe to hell, like a beast ; Gods works 
should not onelie be defaced and disgraced, but his ordinance should 
be woonderfuUie altered, and thereby confounded.

--- PAGE 179 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 6. 8i 
The sixt Chapter. 
The ivitchmotigers objections, concernmg Nabiichndnez-zar an- 
swered, and (heir errour concerning Lycanthropia confuted. 
IaLLEUS MALEFICARUM, Bodin, and manie other of Their 
them that mainteine witchcraft, triumph upon the storie of g™""'*: 
' ^ ^ ^ worke is 
Nabuchadnez-zar ; as though Circes had transformed him as sure as 
with hir sorceries into an oxe, as she did others into quick eele 
swine, &c. I answer, that he was neither in bodie nor shape trans- 
formed at all, accor/ding to their grosse imagination ; as appeareth 102. 
both by the plaine words of the text, and also by the opinions of the Dan. 4. 
best interpretors thereof : but that he was, for his beastlie government 
and conditions, throwne out of his kingdome and banished for a 
time, and driven to hide himselfe in the wildernesse, there in exile to 
lead his life in beastlie sort, among beasts of the field, and fowles of 
the aire (for by the waie I tell you it appeareth by the text, that he 
was rather turned into the shape of a fowle than of a beast) untill he 
rejecting his beastlie conditions, was upon his repentance and amend- 
ment called home, and restored unto his kingdome. Howbeit, this 
(by their confession) was neither divels nor witches dooing ; but a 
miracle wrought by God, whom alone I acknowledge to be able to 
bring to passe such workes at his pleasure. Wherein I would know 
what our witchmongers have gained./ 78. 
I am not ignorant that some write, that after the death of Nabicchad- Cor. Agrip. de 
nez-zar, his sonne *Eilumorodath gave his bodie to the ravens to be ""clp'.'l^"'"'' 
devoured, least afterwards his father should arise from death, who of 
a beast became a man againe. But this tale is meeter to have place °^ ^"'^^ 
in the Cabalisticall art, to wit : among unwritten verities than here. 
To conclude, I sale that the transformations, which these witch- 
mongers doo so rave and rage upon, is (as all the learned sort of 
physicians affirme) a disease proceeding partlie from melancholie, 
wherebie manie suppose themselves to be woolves, or such ravening 
beasts. For Lycanthropia is of the ancient physicians called Lupina Paul. Aegi- 
melancholia, or Ltipina insania. J. Wierus declareth verie learnedlie, 'Aetius^iib. 6^ 
the cause, the circumstance, and the cure of this disease. I have C?'*,-,,'.'- ^ 
written the more herem ; bicause hereby great prmces and prast. dtem. 
potentates, as well as poore women and innocents, 
have beene defamed and accounted 
among the number 
of witches./ 
M

--- PAGE 180 ---
5. Booke. 
The discoverie 
103. 
Mauh. 4, I 
Luk. 3, 9. 
Answer to 
the former 
objection. 
Matt. 26, 5j, 
Job. I, 
Job. 2, 
104. 
79. 
J. Calvine 171 
harmon, E- 
vang. in 
Matth. 4. &^ 
Liik. 4. 
The seventh Chapter. 
A speciall objection answered concernijig transportations, with the 
consent of diverse writers thereupon. 
OR the maintenance of witches transportations, they 
object the words of the Gospell, where the divell is said to 
take up Christ, and ta set him on a pinnacle of the 
temple, and on a mountaine, &c. Which if he had doone 
in maner and forme as they suppose, it followeth not therefore that 
witches could doo the like ; nor yet that the divell would doo it for 
them at their pleasure ; for they know not their thoughts, neither can 
otherwise communicate with them. But I answer, that if it were so 
grosselie to be understood, as they imagine it, yet should it make 
nothing to their purpose. For I hope they will not saie, that Christ 
had made anie ointments, or entred into anie league with the divell, 
and by vertue thereof was transported from out of the wildernes, unto 
the top of the temple of Jerusalem ; or that the divell could have 
maisteries over his bodie, whose soule he could never laie hold upon ; 
especiallie when he might (with a becke of his finger) have called unto 
him, and have had the assistance of manie legions of angels. Neither 
(as I thinke) will they presume to make Christ partaker of the divels 
purpose and sinne in that behalfe. If they saie ; This was an action 
wrought by the speciall providence of God, and by his appointment, 
that the scripture might be fulfilled : then what gaine our witch- 
mongers by this place .'' First, for that they male not produce a par- 
ticular example to prove so generall an argument. And againe, if it 
were by Gods speciall providence and appointment ; then why should 
it not be doone by the hand of God, as it was in the storie of Job ? 
Or if it were Gods speciall purpose and pleasure, that there should be 
so extraordinarie a matter brought to passe by the hand of the divell; 
could not God have given to the wicked angell extraordinarie power, 
and cloathed him with extraordinarie shape ; where/by he might be 
made an instrument able to accomplish that matter, as he did to his 
angell that carried Abacicck to Daniell, and to them that he sent to 
destroie Sodome ? But you shall understand, that / this was doone in 
a vision, and not in veritie of action. So as they have a verie cold 
pull of this place, which is the speciall peece of scripture alledged of 
them for their transportations. 
Heare therefore what Calvine saith in his commentarie upon that 
place, in these words ; The question is, whether Christ were carried 
aloft indeed, or whether it were but in a vision ? Manie affirme verie

--- PAGE 181 ---
of Witchcraft. chap.y 83 
obstinatlie, that his bodie was trulie and realHe as they saie taken 
up : bicause they thinke it too great an indignitie for Christ to be 
made subject to sathans illusions. But this objection is easilie washed 
awaie. For it is no absurditie to grant all this to be wrought through 
Gods permission, or Christes voluntarie subjection : so long as we 
yeeld not to thinke that he suffered these temptations inwardlie, that 
is to saie, in mind or soule. And that which is afterwards set downe 
by the Evangelist, where the divell shewed him all the kingdoms of 
the world, and the glorie of the same, and that to be doone (as it is 
said in Luke) in the twinkling of an eie, dooth more agree with a 
vision than with a reall action. So farre are the verie words of 
Calvine. Which differ not one syllable nor five words from that 
which I had written herein, before I looked for his opinion in the 
matter. And this I hope will be sufficient to overthrow the assertions 
of them that laie the ground of their transportations and flieng in the 
aire hereupon. 
He that will saie, that these words ; to wit, that Christ was taken 
up, &c : can hardlie be applied to a vision, let him turne to the 
prophesie of Ezecliiell, and see the selfe-same words used in a vision : Ezec. 3, 12. 
saving that where Christ is said to be taken up by the divell, Ezechiell ^""^ 
is taken up, and lifted up, and carried by the spirit of God, and yet 
in a vision. But they have lesse reason that build upon this sandie 
rocke, the supernaturall frame of transubstantiation ; as almost all our 
witching writers doo. For Sprenger & Institor saie, that the divell Mai. male/. 
in the likenesse of a falcon caught him up. Danaus saith, it was in 
the similitude of a man ; others saie, of an angell painted with wings ; 
others, invisiblie: Ergo the di/vell can take (saie they) what shape he zoj. 
list. But though some may cavill upon the divels transforming of 
himselfe ; yet, that either divell or witch can transforme or transub- 
stantiat others, there is no tittle nor colour in the scriptures to helpe 
them. If there were authoritie for it, and that it were past all perad- 
venture, lo, what an easie matter it is to resubstantiate an asse into a 
man. For Bodin saith upon the word of Aptilems, that if the asse j. Bod. lib. de 
eate new roses, anise, or bale leaves out of spring water, it ^' ^ 
will presentlie returne him into a man. Which thing 
Spre7iger saith male be doone, by washing the in Mai. mal. 
asse in faire water : yea he sheweth an 
instance, where, by drinking of 
water an asse was turned 
into a man.

--- PAGE 182 ---
84 5 Bvoke. The disc over ie 
The eight Chapter. 
The lijiichviongers objection cojicerning the historie of Job answered. 
80. 
• Job. I, 14. 
verse, 15. 
« verse, 16. 
^ verse, 17. 
106. 
" verse, 18. 
' verse, 19. 
8 Ibid. ca. 
vers. 7. 
? searsing] 
HESE witchmongers, for lacke of better arguments, doo 
mania times object Job against me ; although there be 
never a word in that storie, which either maketh for 
them, or against me : in so much as there is not/ the 
name of a witch mentioned in the whole booke. But (I praie you) 
what witchmonger now seeing one so afflicted as Job, would not 
saie he were bewitched, as Job never saith 
Tor first there came a 
messenger unto him, and said ; Thy oxen were plowing, and thy 
asses were feeding in their places, ''and the Sabeans came violentlie 
and tooke them ; yea they have slaine thy servants with the edge of 
the sword ; but I onelie am escaped to tell thee. ''And whilest he was 
yet speaking, another came, and said ; The fier of God is fallen from 
the heaven, & hath burnt up thy sheepe and thy servants, and de- 
voured them ; but I onlie am escaped to tell thee. <^And while he 
was yet speaking, another came, and said ; The Chaldtxatis set out 
their bands, and fell upon thy camels, and have taken them, and have 
slaine thy servants with the edge of the sword ; but I onelie am/ 
escaped alone to tell thee. ^And whilest he was yet speaking, came 
another, and said ; Thy sonnes and thy daughters were eating and 
drinking wine in their elder brothers house, %nd behold there came a 
great wind from beyond the wildernesse, and smote the foure corners 
of the house, which fell upon thy children, and they are dead ; and I 
onlie am escaped alone to tell thee, egesides all this, he was smitten 
with biles, from the sole of his foote to the crowne of his head. If 
anie man in these daies called Job should be by the appointment or 
hand of God thus handled, as this Job was ; I warrant you that all 
the old women in the countrie would be called Coram nobis : warrants 
would be sent out on everie side, publike and private inquirie made 
what old women latelie resorted to Jobs house, or to anie of those 
places, where these misfortunes fell. If anie poore old woman had 
chanced within two or three moneths to have borrowed a curtsie of 
*seasing, or to have fetcht from thence a pot of milke, or had she 
required some almes, and not obteined it at Jobs hand ; there had 
beene argument enough to have brought hir to confusion : and to be 
more certeine to have the right witch apprehended, figures must have 
beene cast, the sive and sheares must have beene set on worke; 
yea rather than the witch should escape, a conjuror must have earned 
a little monie, a circle must have beene made, and a divell raised to

--- PAGE 183 ---
of Witchcraft, chap. s. 85 
tell the truth : mother Biaigie must have been gon unto, and after 
she had learned hir name, whom Job most suspected, she would 
have confirmed the suspicion with artificiall accusations : in the 
end, some woman or other must have beene hanged for it. But as 
Job said ; Doinimes dedit : so said he not ; Diabolus vel Lamia sed 
Doniintts abstiilit. Which agreeth with the tenor of the text, where 
it is written, that the divell at everie of Jobs afflictions desired God 
to laie his hand upon him. Insomuch as Job imputed no part of his j. Calvin in 
calamitie unto divels, witches, nor yet unto conjurors, or their 
inchantments ; as we have learned now to doo. Neither sinned he, 
or did God any wrong, when he laid it to his charge : but we dis- 
honour God greatlie, when we attribute either the power or proprietie 
of God the creator unto a creature. 
*Calvine saith ; We derogate much from Gods glorie and omnipo- *J- Calvin, in 
tencie, when we sale he dooth but give sathan leave to doo it : which '^serm'on. %. 
is (saith he) to mocke Gods justice ; and so fond an asser/tion, that if Muscui.m ^ 
^ ' -* . . ' loc. comm. ' 
asses could speake, they would speake more wiselie than so. For a idem, ibidem. 
temporall judge saith not to /the hangman ; I give thee leave to hang 81. 
this offender, but commandeth him to doo it. But the mainteiners of 
witches omnipotencie, sale ; Doo you not see how reallie and pal- 
pablie the divell tempted and plagued Job ? I answer first, that there 
is no corporall or visible divell named nor scene in any part of that 
circumstance ; secondlie, that it was the hand of God that did it ; 
thirdlie, that as there is no communitie betweene the person of a 
witch, and the person of a divell, so was there not any conference or 
practise betwixt them in this case. 
And as touching the communication betwixt God and the divell, y. Caivine in 
behold what Caivine saith, writing or rather preaching of purpose '^^p^njl^^'' 
upon that place, wherupon they thinke they have so great advantage; 
When sathan is said to appeere before God, it is not doone in some 
place certeine, but the scripture speaketh so to applie it selfe to our 
rudenes. Certeinlie the divell in this and such like cases is an in- 
strument to worke Gods will, and not his owne : and therefore it is 
an ignorant and an ungodlie saieng (as Caivine judgeth it) to affirme, 
that God dooth but permit and suffer the divell. For if sathan were 
so at his owne libertie (saith he) we should be overwhelmed at a 
sudden. And doubtlesse, if he had power to hurt the bodie, there 
were no waie to resist : for he would come invisiblie upon us, and 
knocke us on the heads ; yea hee would watch the best and dispatch 
them, whilest they were about some wicked act. If they sale ; God 
commandeth him, no bodie impugneth them : but that God should 
give him leave, I sale with Caivine., that the divell is not in such 
favour with God, as to obteine any such request, at his hands.

--- PAGE 184 ---
86 
5- Booke. 
The discoverie 
J. Calvine in 
Job. cap. I. 
sermon. 5. 
Mai. male/, 
pa. I. qua'st. I. 
Idem part. i. 
quasi. 4. loS. 
Note what 
is said tou- 
ching the 
booke of 
Job. 
In legenda 
aurea. 
82. 
And wheras by our witchmongers opinions and arguments, the 
witch procureth the divell, and the divell asketh leave of God to 
plague whom the witch is disposed : there is not (as I have said) any 
such corporall communication betweene the divell and a witch, as 
witchmongers imagine. Neither is God mooved at all at sathans sute, 
who hath no such favour or grace with him, as to obteine any thing 
at his hands. 
But M. Mai. and his friends denie, that there were any witches in 
Jobs time : yea the witchmongers are content to saie, that/ there were 
none found to exercise this art in Christs time, from his birth to his 
death, even by the space of thirtie three yeares. If there had beene 
anie (saie they) they should have beene there spoken of. As touching 
the authoritie of the booke of Job, there is no question but that it is 
verie canonicall and authentike. Howbeit, manie writers, both of the 
Jewes and others, are of opinion, that Moses was the author of this 
booke ; and that he did set it as a looking glasse before the people : 
to the intent the children of Abraham (of whose race he himselfe 
came) might knowe, that God shewed favour to others that were not 
of the same line, and be ashamed of their wickednesse : seeing an 
uncircumcised Painime had so well demeaned himselfe. Upon which 
argument Calvine (though he had written upon the same) saith, that 
Forsomuch as it is uncerteine, whether it were Res gesta or Exempli 
gratia, we must leave it in suspense. Nevertheles (sailh he) let us 
take that which is out of all doubt ; namelie, that the Holy-ghost 
hath indited the booke, to the end that the Jewes should knowe that 
God hath had a people alwaies to serve him throughout the world, 
even of such as were no/ Jewes, nor segregated from other nations. 
Howbeit, I for my part denie not the veritie of the storie ; though 
indeed I must confesse, that I thinke there was no such corporall 
enterlude betweene God, the divell, and Job, as they imagine : neither 
anie such reall presence and communication as the witchmongers 
conceive and mainteine ; who are so grosse herein, that they doo not 
onlie beleeve, but publish so palpable absurdities concerning such 
reall actions betwixt the divell and man, as a wise man would be 
ashamed to read, but much more to credit : as that S. Dunstan lead 
the divell about the house by the nose with a paire of pinsors or tongs, 
and made him rore so lowd, as the place roong thereof, &c : with a 
thousand the like fables, without which neither the art of poperie 
nor of witchcraft could stand. But you may see more of this matter 
else-where, where in few words (which I thought good here to omit, 
least I should seeme to use too manie repetitions) I answer effectuallie 
to their cavils about this place./

--- PAGE 185 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Cliap. 9. 
The ninth Chapter. 
What several! sorts of witches are mentioned in the scriptures^ and 
how the word witch is there applied. 
|UT what sorts of witches so ever M. Mai. or Bodin saie 
there are ; Moses spake onlie of foure kinds of impious 
couseners or witches (whereof our witchmongers old 
women which danse with the fairies, &c; are none.) The 
first were Prcestigiatores Pharaonis, which (as all divines, both 
Hebrues and others conclude) were but couseners and jugglers, 
deceiving the kings eies with illusions and sleights ; and making false 
things to appeare as true : which nevertheles our witches cannot 
doo. The second is Mecasapha., which is she that destroieth with 
poison. The third are such as use sundrie kinds of divinations, and 
hereunto perteine these words, Kasatn, Onen, Ob, Idoni. The fourth 
is Habar, to wit : when magicians, or rather such, as would be re- 
puted cunning therein, mumble certeine secret words, wherin is 
thought to be great efficacie. 
These are all couseners and abusers of the people in their severall 
kinds. But bicause they are all termed of our translators by the 
name of witches in the Bible : therefore the lies of M. Mai. and 
Bodin, and all our old wives tales are applied unto these names, and 
easilie beleeved of the common people, who have never hitherto beene 
instructed in the understanding of these words. In which respect, I 
will (by Gods grace) shew you (concerning the signification of them) 
the opinion of the most learned in our age ; speciallie of Johannes 
Wiertcs ; who though hee himselfe were singularlie learned in the 
toongs, yet for his satisfaction and full resolution in the same, he sent 
for the judgement of Andrceas Massius, the most famous Hebrician in 
the world, and had it in such sense and order, as I meane to set 
downe unto you. And yet I give you this note by the waie, that 
witchcraft or inchantment is diverslie taken in the scriptures ; som- 
times nothing tending to such end as it is commonlie thought to doo. 
For in i Sajmuell, 15, 23. it is all one with rebellion. Jesabell forhir 
idolatrous life / is called a witch. Also in the new testament, even S. 
Paule saith the Galathians are bewitched, bicause they were seduced 
and lead from the true understanding of the scriptures. 
Item sometimes it is taken in good part ; as the magicians that came 
to worship and offer to Christ: and also where Daniell is said to be 
an inchanter, yea a principall inchanter : which title being given him 
in divers places of that storie, he never seemeth to refuse or dislike ; 
log. 
I. Praestigi- 
atores 
Pharaonis. 
2. Mecasa- 
pha. 
3. Kasam. 
Onen. 
Ob. 
Idoni. 
4. Habar. 
[or Mashis] 
Note. 
no. 
1. Sa. 15, 23. 
2. Re. 9, 22. 83. 
Gal. 3, I. 
Matth. 2, I, 
Daniel. 4.

