hat there dwelt one at Endor. By the waie 
you shall understand, that both Saule and his servants ment such a one 
as could by hir spirit raise up Samuell, or any other that was dead and 
buried. Wherein you see they were deceived, though it were true, that 
she tooke upon hir so to doo. To what use then served hir familiar 
spirit, which you conceive she had, bicause Saules servants said so .'' 
Surelie, as they were deceived and abused in part, so doubtlesse were ^ ^. 
they in the rest. For to what purpose (I saie) should hir familiar serve, familiar.

--- PAGE 214 ---
1 1 6 7 Bookc. The discoverie 
if not for such intents as they reported, and she undertooke? I thinke 
you will grant that Smiles men never sawe hir familiar : for I never 
heard any yet of credit saie, that he was so much in the witches favour, 
as to see hir divell ; although indeed we read among the popisli trum- 
perie, that S. Cicilie had an angell to hir familiar, and that she could 
shew him to whom she would, and that she might aske and have what 
107. she or hir/ friend list : as appeareth in the lesson read in the popish 
church on saint Cicilies daie. Well, I perceive the woman of Endors 
spirit was a counterfeit, and kept belike in hir closet at Endor, or in 
the bottle, with mother Alices divell at IVestwell, and are now 
bewraied and fled togither to Limbo patriim, &^c. And though Saule 
were bewitched and blinded in the matter ; yet doubtlesse a wise 
man wold have perchance espied her knaverie. Me thinks Saule 
D. Burcot. was brought to this witch, much after the maner that doctor Burcot 
vi'as brought to Feats, who sold maister Doctor a familiar, wherby 
he thought to have wrought miracles, or rather to have gained good 
store of monie. This fellowe by the name oi Feats was a jugler, by 
the name of Hilles a witch or conjurer, everie waie a cousener : his 
qualities and feats were to me and manie other well knowne 
and detected. And yet the opinion conceived of him was most 
strange and woonderfull ; even with such and in such cases, as it 
greeveth me to thinke of ; speciallie bicause his knaverie and 
^4S- cou/senage reached to the shedding of innocent bloud. But now 
I. Sam. 28, 8 forsooth Saiile covereth himselfe with a net ; and bicause he would 
not be knowne, he put on other garments. But to bring that matter 
I. Sa 10, 23. to passe, he must have beene cut shorter by the head and shoulders, 
for by so much he was higher than any of the people. And therfore 
whatsoever face the craftie quene did set upon it, she knew him well 
enough. And for further proofe thereof, you may understand, that 
the princes of the Jewes were much conversant with the people. And 
Ibidem. it appeereth manifestlie, that Smile dwelt verie neere to Endor, so as 
she should the rather knowe him ; for in the evening he went from 
his lodging unto hir house : neither should it seeme that she was 
gone to bed when he came. But bicause that may be uncerteine, you 
may see in the processe of the text, that in a peece of the night he 
went from his house to hirs, and with much adoo intreated her to 
consent to his request. She finished hir conjuration, so as both 
Saules part, the witches part, and also Samuels part was plaied : and 
after the solemnization therof, a calfe was killed, a batch of bread 
baked, and a supper made readie and eaten up ; and after all this, he 
went home the same night : and had need so to doo, for he had some 
businesse the next daie. By these and manie other circumstances it 
may bee gathered, that she dissembled, in saieng she knew him not,

--- PAGE 215 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap, 12. 
and consequentlie counterfaited, and made a foole of him in all the 
rest. 
It appeereth there, that he, with a couple of his men, went to hir Ibidem, 
by night, and said ; Conjecture unto me by thy familiar spirit, and 
bring me up whom I shall name unto thee. The godlie learned 
knowe that this was not in the power of the witch of Endor, but in the 
God of heaven onelie to accomplish. Howbeit, Satde was bewitched 
so to suppose : and yet is he more simple that will be overtaken with 
the devises of our old witches, which are produced to resemble hir. 
And why should we thinke, that GOD would rather permit the witch to 
raise Samuel, than that Dives could obteine Lazarus to come out of 
Abrahams bosome, upon more likelie and more reasonable condi- 
tions ? Well now dooth this strumpet (according to the guise of our 
cousening witches and conjurers) make the matter strange unto 
Saule, saieng that he came to take hir in a snare, &c./ But witches '•Sam. 28,9 
seldome make/ this objection, saving when they mistrust that he which 14^- 
commeth to them will espie their jugling : for otherwise, where the 
witchmonger is simple and easie to be abused, the witch will be as 
easie to be intreated, and nothing dangerous of hir cunning ; as you 
see this witch was soone persuaded (notwithstanding that objection) 
bicause she perceived and sawe that Saide was affraid and out of his 
wits. And therfore she said unto him; Whom shall I raise up? i. Sa. 28. 12 
As though she could have brought unto him Abraham, Isaac, or 
Jacob ; who cannot heare us, therefore cannot rise at our call. For 
it is written ; Looke thou downe from heaven and behold us, &c : as Isa. 63, 15. 
for Abraham he is ignorant of us, and Israel knoweth us not. 
The twelfe Chapter. 
The 12. 13. 14. verses of i. Sajiiuel 28. expounded : wherin is 
shewed that Saule was cotcsened and abused by the witch, and 
that Samuel was not raised, is prooved by the witches owne talke. 
HE manner and circumstance of their communication, or 
of hir conjuration, is not verbatim set downe and ex- 
pressed in the text ; but the effect thereof breeflie 
touched : yet will I shew you the common order of their 
conjuration, and speciallie of hirs at this time used. ^\izvi Saule The maner 
had told hir, that he would have Sajiiuel brought up to him, she Endors 
departed from his presence into hir closet, where doubtles she had o°s^^"i'g^ 
hir familiar ; to wit, some lewd craftie preest, and made Saule stand 
at the doore like a foole (as it were with his finger in a hole) to heare 
the cousening answers, but not to see the cousening handling thereof.

--- PAGE 216 ---
I I 8 7 Boolie. 
The discoverie 
and the couterfetting of the matter. And so goeth she to worke, using 
ordinarie words of conjuration, of which there are sundrie varieties 
and formes (whereof I shall have occasion to repeat some in another 
place) as you see the juglers (which be inferior conjurors) speake 
147- certeine strange words of course to lead awaie the eie from espi/eng 
the maner of their conyeiance, whilest they may induce the mind to 
conceive and suppose that he dealeth with spirits ; saieng, Hay, 
fortune furie, nunqj credo, passe, passe, when come you sirra. So 
belike after many such words spoken, she saith to hir selfe ; Lo now 
the matter is brought to passe, for I see woonderfull things. So as 
I. Sa. 28, 13. Saule hearing these words, longed to knowe all, and asked hir what 
she sawe. Whereby you may know that Satile sawe nothing, but 
stood without like a mome, whilest she plaied hir part in hir closet : 
I. Sa. 28, 21. 3s may most evidentlie appeere by the 21. verse of this chapter where 
it is said ; Then the woman came out unto Saule. Howbeit, a little 
before she cunninglie counterfaited that she sawe Samuel, and thereby 
knewe it was Satile that was come unto hir. Whereby all the world 
may perceive the cousening, and hir dissimulation. For by that 
which hath beene before said, it must needs be that she knew him. 
And (I praie you) why should she not have suspected aswell him to 
be Saule before, when in expresse words he required hir to bring 
unto him Samuel, as now, when Samuel appeered unto hir.'/ 
i.Sa. 28, 4. 109. Well, to the question before proposed by Saide, she answereth and 
lieth, that she saw angels or gods ascending up out of the earth. 
Then proceedeth she with her inchanting phrases and words of 
course : so as thereby Saule gathereth and supposeth that she hath 
raised a man. For otherwise his question dependeth not upon any 
thing before spoken. For when she hath said ; I sawe angels ascend- 
ing, &c : the next word he saith is ; What fashion is he of? Which 
(I sale) hangeth not upon hir last expressed words. And to this 
she answered not directlie, that it was Satmcel ; but that it was an old 
man lapped in a mantell : as though she knew not him that was the 
most notorious man in Israeli, that had beene her neighbour by the 
space of manie yeeres, and upon whom (while he lived) everie eie 
was fixed, and whom also she knew within lesse than a quarter of an 
houre before, as by whose meanes also she came acquainted with 
I. Sa. 28, 12. Saule. Read the text and see. 
But she describeth his personage, and the apparell which he did 
usuallie weare when he lived : which if they were both buried to- 
gither, were consumed and rotten, or devoured with wormes before 
148. that time. Belike he had a new mantell made him in hea/ven : and 
yet they sale Tailors are skantie there, for that their consciences are 
so large here. In this countrie, men give awaie their garments when

--- PAGE 217 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 13. 119 
they die : if Samuel had so doone, hee could not have borrowed it 
againe ; for of likliehood it would have beene worne out in that space, 
except the donee had beene a better husband than I : for the testator 
was dead (as it is supposed) two yeares before. 
The xiii. Chapter. 
The residue of i. Sa7n. 28. expounded : wherin is declared hoiv 
amninglie this witch brought Saiile resolutelie to beleeve that she 
raised Samuel, what words are used to colour the cousenage, and 
how all fnight also be wrought by ventriloquie. 
I OW commeth in Samuel to plaie his part : but I am per- 
suaded it was performed in the person of the witch hir 
selfe, or of hir confederate. He saith to Saule ; Why >• Sa. 28, 15. 
has thou disquieted me, to bring me up ? As though 
without guile or packing it had beene Samuel himselfe. Saule ibidem, 
answered that he was in great distresse : for the Philistines made warre 
upon him. Whereby the witch, or hir confederate priest might easilie 
conjecture that his heart failed, and direct the oracle or prophesie 
accordinglie : especiallie understanding by his present talke, and 
also by former prophesies and dooings that were past, that God had 
forsaken him, and that his people were declining from him. For ^ ^ 
when Jonathaji (a little before) overthrew the Philistines, being thirtie 
thousand chariots and six thousand horssemen ; Saule could not 
assemble above six hundred souldiers. i. Sa. 13, 15. 
Then said Samuel (which some suppose was sathan, and as I 
thinke was the witch, with a confederate ; for \Vhat need so farre 
fetches, as to fetch a divell supernaturallie out of hell, when the 
illusion may be here by natu/rall meanes deciphered ? And if you 110. 
note the words well, you shall perceive the phrase not to come out/ 
of a spirituall mouth of a divell, but from a lieng corporall toong of i4g. 
a cousener, that careth neither for God nor the divell, fro whence 
issueth such advise and communication, as greatlie disagreeth from 
sathans nature and purpose. For thus (I sale) the said Samuel 
speaketh : Wherefore dooest thou aske me, seeing the Lord is gone i- Sam. 28. 
from thee, and is thine enemie.' Even the Lord hath doon unto him 
as he spake by mine hand: for the Lord will rent thy kingdome out i- Sa. 15, 28. 
of thine hand, and give it to thy neighbour David, bicause thou 
obeiedst not the voice of the Lord, &c. This (I say) is no phrase of 
a divell, but of a cousener, which knew before what Samuel had 
prophesied concerning Saules destruction. For it is the divels con- 
dition, to allure the people unto wickednes, and not in this sort to

--- PAGE 218 ---
1 20 7- Booke. The discoverie 
admonish, vvarne, and rebuke them for evill. And the popish writers 
confes, that the divell would have beene gone at the first naming of 
God. If it bee said, that it was at Gods speciall commandement and 
will, that Samuel or the divell should be raised, to propound this 
admonition, to the profit of all posteritie: I answer, that then he 
would rather have doone it by some of his living prophets, and that 
sathan had not beene so fit an instrument for that purpose. After 
this falleth the witch (I would sale Samuel) into the veine of prophe- 
i.Sa 28,17. sieng, and speaketh to Saide on this wise; The Lord will rent thy 
' ■ kingdome out of thine hand, and give it to thy neighbor David, 
bicause thou obeiedst not the voice of the Lord, nor executedst his 
fierse wrath upon the Amalekites: therefore hath the Lord doone this 
19. unto thee this daie. Moreover, the Lord will deliver thee into the 
hands of the Philistines, and to morrowe shalt thou and thy sonnes be 
with me, and the Lord shall give the host of Israel into the hands of 
the Philistines. What could Samuel have said more 
Me thinks the divell would have used another order, encouraging 
Saule rather than rebuking him for his evill. The divell is craftier 
than to leave such an admonition to all posterities, as should be 
prejudiciall unto his kingdome, and also be void of all impietie. But 
so divine a sentence maketh much for the maintenance of the witches 
credit, and to the advancement of hir gaines. Howbeit, concerning the 
veritie of this prophesie, there be many disputable questions: first, 
whether the battell were fought the next daie; secondlie, whether all 
Tjo. his sonnes were kil/led with him; item, whether they went to heaven 
or hell togither, as being with Samuel, they must be in heaven, and 
being with sathan, they must be in hell. But although everie part of 
this prophesie were false, as that all his sonnes were not slaine {Ishbo- 
sheth living and reigning in Israel two yeares after Saules death) and 
that the battell was not on the morrow, and that wicked Saule, after 
2. Reg. 4. that he had killed himselfe, was not with good Samuel ; yet this witch 
did give a shrewd gesse to the sequele. Which whether it were true 
or false, perteins not to my purpose ; and therfore I will omit it. But 
as touching the opinion of them that saie it was the divell, bicause 
that such things came to passe ; I would faine knowe of them where 
they learne that divels foreknow things to come. If they saie he 
gesseth onelie upon probabilities, the witch may also doo the like. 
Canon. 26. But here I may not forget the decrees, which conclude, that Saimtel 
nl7m!rum^' appeered not unto Saule ; but that the historiographer set foorth/ 
111. Saules mind and Sainuels estate, and certeine things which were said 
& seene, omitting whether they were true or false : and further, that 
it were a great offense for a man to beleeve the bare words of the 
storie. And if this exposition like you not, I can easilie frame my

--- PAGE 219 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. h. 121 
selfe to the opinion of some of great learning, expounding this place, 
and that with great probabilitie, in this sort; to wit, that this 
Pythonist being Ventriloqua ; that is. Speaking as it were from the 
bottome of hir bellie, did cast hir selfe into a transe, and so abused 
Saule, answering to Saule in Samuels name, in hir counterfeit 
hollow voice : as the wench of Westwell spake, whose historic I have ^. 
rehearsed before at large, in pag. 127 and this is right Ventriloquie.\ qufe. 
The xiiii. Chapter. 151- 
opinions of some learned men, thai Samuel was indeed raised, not 
by the witches art or power, but by the speciall miracle of God, 
that there are no such visions in these our dales, that our 
witches cannot doo the like. 
I IAS and Sadaias write, that when the woman sawe the 
miracle indeed, and more than she looked for, or was 
woont to doo; she began to crie out, that this was a 
vision indeed, and a true one, not doone by hir art, but 
by the power of God. Which exposition is far more probable than 
our late writers judgements hereupon, andagreeth with the exposition 
of diverse good divines. Gelasius saith, it was the verie spirit of 
Samuel : and where he suffered himself to be worshipped, it was but 
in civill salutation and courtesie; and that God did interpose Samuel, |j vafrus* 
as he did Elias to the messenger of Ochosias, when he sent to differ here- 
Belzebub the god of Acharon. And here is to'be noted, that the 
witchmongers are set up in this point: for the papists saie, that it 
cannot be a divell, bicause Jehovah is thrise or five times named in 
the storie. Upon this peece of scripture arguments are daielie 
devised, to proove and mainteine the miraculous actions of witch- 
craft, and the raising of the dead by conjurations. And yet if it were 
true, that Samuel himselfe were raised, or the divell in his likenesse; 
and that the witch of Endor by hir art and cunning did it, &c: it 
maketh rather to the disproofe than to the proofe of our witches, 
which can neither do that kind of miracle, or any other, in any such 
place or companie, where their jugling and cousenage may be seen 
and laid open. And I challenge them all (even upon the adventure A bold, dis- 
of my life) to shew one peece of a miracle, such as Christ did trulie, fluMuii'^ 
or such as they suppose this witch did diabolicallie, be it not with ciia"e"g« 
art nor confederacie, whereby some colour thereof may be made ; 
neither are there any such visions in these daies shewed. 
Heretofore God did send his visible angels to men : but now/ we 152 
heare not of such apparitions, neither are they necessarie. Indeed it 
R

--- PAGE 220 ---
122 
7. Booke. 
The discoverie 
[• ns read us.'\ 
• At Can- 
turburie by 
Rich. Lee 
esquire, & 
others, 
anno. 1573. 
At Rie by 
maister 
Gaymor & 
others, 
anno. 1577. 
J. Wier. lib. 3 
cap. 8. 
Theodor. 
Bizantius. 
Lavat. de 
sped. & le- 
murib. 
Cardan, de 
var. rerum 
Peucer, (ic. 
pleased God heretofore, by the hand of Moses and his prophets, and 
speciallie by his sonne Christ and his apostles, to worke great 
113. miracles, for the establish/ing of the faith: but now whatsoever is 
necessarie for our salvation, is conteined in the word of God : our 
faith is alredie confirmed, and our church established by miracles; so 
as now to seeke for them, is a point of infidelitie. Which the papists 
(if you note it) are greatlie touched withall, as in their lieng legends 
appeareth. But in truth, our miracles are knaveries most commonlie, 
and speciallie of priests, whereof I could cite a thousand. If you 
read the storie of Bell and the dragon, you shall find a cousening 
miracle of some antiquitie. If you will see newer devises, read 
Wierus, Carda7itis, Baleus, and speciallie Lavaiertts,* &'c. There 
have beene some *walking spirits in these parts so conjured not long 
since, as afterwards they little delighted to make anie more appari- 
tions. 
The XV. Chapter. 
0/ vaine apparitions, how people have beene brought to feare bugges, 
which is partlie refortned by preaching of the gospell, the true 
effect of Christes miracles. 
|UT certeinlie, some one knave in a white sheete hath 
cousened and abused manie thousands that waie; special- 
lie when Robin good-fellow kept such a coile in the 
countrie. But you shall understand, that these bugs 
speciallie are spied and feared of sicke folke, children, women, and 
cowards, which through weaknesse of mind and bodie, are shaken 
with vaine dreames and continuall feare. The Scythians., being a 
stout and a warlike nation (as divers writers report) never see anie 
vaine sights or spirits. It is a common saieng; A lion feareth no 
bugs. But in our childhood our mothers maids have so terrified us 
with an ouglie divell having homes on his head, fier in his mouth, and 
133. a taile in/ his breech, eies like a bason, fanges like a dog, clawes like 
a beare, a skin like a Niger, and a voice roring like a lion, whereby 
we start and are afraid when we heare one crie Bough: and they have 
so fraied us with bull beggers, spirits, witches, urchens, elves, hags, 
fairies, satyrs, pans, faunes, sylens, kit with the cansticke, tritons, 
centaurs, dwarfes, giants, imps, calcars, conjurors, nymphes, chang- 
lings, Incubus, Robin good-fellowe, the spoorne, the mare, the man in 
the oke, the hell waine, the fierdrake, the puckle, Tom thombe, hob 
gobblin, Tom tumbler, boneles, and such other bugs, that we are afraid 
of our owne shadowes: in so much as some never feare the divell, but 
in a darke night; and then a polled sheepe is a perillous beast, and

--- PAGE 221 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 15. 
manie times is taken for our fathers soule, speciallie in a churchyard, 
where a right hardie man heretofore scant durst passe by night, but 
his haire would stand upright. For right grave writers report, that 
spirits most often and speciallie take the shape of women appearing to 
monks, &c : and of beasts, dogs, swine, horsses, gotes, cats, haires ; of 
fowles, as crowes, night owles, and shreeke owles; but they delight 
most in the likenes of snakes and dragons. Well, thanks be to God, 
this wretched and cowardlie infidelitie, since the preaching of the 
gospell, is in part forgotten : and doubtles, the rest of those illusions 
will in short time/ (by Gods grace) be detected and vanish awaie. 
Divers writers report, that in Germanie, since Luthers time, spirits 
and divels have not personallie appeared, as in times past they were 
woont to doo. This argument is taken in hand of the ancient fathers, 
to proove the determination and ceasing of oracles. For in times 
past (saith Athanasius) divels in vaine shapes did intricate men with 
their illusions, hiding themselves in waters, stones, woods, &c. But 
now that the word of GOD hath appeared, those sights, spirits, and 
mockeries of images are ceased. Truelie, if all such oracles, as that 
ol Apollo, &c (before the comming of Christ) had beene true, and 
doone according to the report, which hath beene brought through 
divers ages, and from farre countries unto us, without preestlie fraud 
or guile, so as the spirits of prophesie, and working of miracles, had 
beene inserted into an idoll, as hath beene supposed: yet we christians 
may conceive, that Christs coming was not so fruteles and pre/judi- 
ciall in this point unto us, as to take awaie his spirit of prophesie and 
divination from out of the mouth of his elect people, and good 
prophets, giving no answers of anie thing to come by them, nor by 
Urim nor TJm}nim, as he was woont, &c. And yet to leave the divell 
in the mouth of a witch, or an idoll to prophesie or worke miracles, 
&c: to the hinderance of his glorious gospell, to the discountenance of 
his church, and to the furtherance of infidelitie and false religion, 
whereas the working of miracles was the onelie, or at least the most 
speciall meanes that mooved men to beleeve in Christ: as appeareth 
in sundrie places of the gospell, and speciallie in John, where it is 
written, that a great multitude followed him, bicause they sawe his 
miracles which he did, &c. Naie, is it not written, that Jesus was 
approoved by God among the Jewes, with miracles, wonders 
and signes, &c ? And yet, if we conferre the miracles 
wrought by Christ, and those that are imputed 
to witches ; witches miracles shall 
appeare more common, and 
nothing inferior 
unto his, 
Lavat. de 
sped. 
113. 
Car. de var. 
rem m . 
J. Wier. de 
prccst. dcemon. 
Athanas. de 
humanitate 
verbi. 
154- 
The true 
end of mi- 
racles. 
John 2. 
Act. 2. 2 
John. 5.

