 witches, and preests were woont to 
give oracles, and to worke their feats. 
jHESE cousening oracles, or rather oraclers used (I saie) 
to exercise their feats and to doo their miracles most 
commonly in maids, in beasts, in images, in dens, in 
cloisters, in darke holes, in trees, in churches or church- 
yards, &c: where preests, moonks, and friers had laid their plots, and 
made their confederacies aforehand, to beguile the world, to gaine 
monie, and to adde credit to their profession. This practise began

--- PAGE 231 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 6. 1^3 
in the okes of Dodona, in the which was a wood, the trees thereof strabo Gcog. 
(they saie) could speake. And this was doone by a knave in a ^j^wier.u. i. 
hollowe tree, that seemed sound unto the simple people. This wood de press, diem. 
was in Molossus a part of Greece., called Epyrus, and it was named 
Dodonas oracles. There were manie oracles in Aegypt ; namelie, of 
Hercules, of Apollo., of Minerva, of Diana, of Mars, of Jupiter, and 
of the oxe Apys, who was the sonne of Jupiter, but his image was 
worshipped in the likenesse of an oxe. Latona, who was the mother 
of Apollo, was an oracle in the citie of Btete. The preests of Apollo, 
who alwaies counterfaited furie and madnesse, gave oracles in the 
temple called C/ar/z^j, within the citie of Colophon in Greece. At Thebes 
in Bceotia and also in Lcebadia, Trophonius was the cheefe oracle. 
At Mejnphis a cow, at Corinth an oxe called Mi?teies, in Arsinoe a 
crocodile, in Athens a prophet called A)?tphiaraus, who / indeed i66. 
died at Thebes, where they saie the earth opened, & swallowed him 
up quicke. At Delphos was the great temple of Apollo, where 
divels gave oracles by maides (as some saie) though indeed it was 
doone by preests. It was built upon Parnassus hill in Greece. 
And the defenders of oracles saie, that even as rivers oftentimes 
are diverted to another course ; so likewise the spirit, which in- 
spired the cheefe prophets, may for a time be silent, and revive 
againe by revolution. 
Demetrius saith, that the spirits, which attended on oracles, waxed 
wearie of the peoples curiositie and importunitie, and for shame for- 
sooke the temple. But as *one that of late hath written against * H. Haw. in 
prophesies saith ; It is no marvell, that when . the familiars that sative a" 
speake in trunks were repelled from their harbour for feare of dis- gainst pro- 
pn6S16S. 
coverie, the blocks almightie lost their senses. For these are all 
gone now, and their knaverie is espied ; so as they can no longer 
abuse the world with such babies. But whereas / these great doctors 122. 
suppose, that the cause of their dispatch was the comming of Christ ; 
if they meane that the divell died, so soone as he was borne, or that 
then he gave over his occupation: they are deceived. For the popish 
church hath made a continuall practise hereof, partlie for their owne 
private profit, lucre, and gaine ; and partly to be had in estimation 
of the world, and in admiration among the simple. But indeed, 
men that have learned Christ, and beene conversant in his word, 
have discovered and shaken off the vanitie and abhomination 
heereof. But if those doctors had lived till this dale, they would 
have said and written, that oracles had ceased, or rather beene driven 
out of England in the time of K. Henrie the eight, and of Queene ^^J^^^l^. 
Elizabeth his daughter ; who have doone so much in that behalfe, as cies ceased 
at this houre they are not onlie all gone, but forgotten here in this ^"^'and

--- PAGE 232 ---
8. Bookc. 
The discoverie 
English nation, where they swarmed as thicke as they did in Baotia^ 
or in any other place in the world. But the credit they had, depended 
not upon their desart, but upon the credulitie of others. Now there- 
fore I will conclude and make an end of this matter, with the 
opinion andsaieng of the prophet ; Vaine is the answer 
of idols. For they have eies and see not, 
cares and heare not, mouthes and 
speake not, &c: and let them 
shew what is to come, 
and I will saie 
they are gods 
indeed.//

--- PAGE 233 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. I. 
\ The ninth Booke. 
The first Chapter. 
The Hebrue word Kasam ex-pounded, and how farre a Christian 
may conjecture of things to come. 
ASAM (as John Wierits upon his owne knowledge 
affirmeth, and upon the word of Andrceas Masius re- 
porteth) differeth little in signification from the former 
word Ob : betokening Vaticinari, which is, To prophesie, 
and is most commonlie taken in evill part; as in Deut. iZ. Jerem. 27. 
&c: howbeit, sometime in good part, as in Esaie 3. verse. 2. To 
foretell things to come upon probable conjectures, so as therein we 
reach no further than becommeth humane capacitie, is not (in mine 
opinion) unlawfull, but rather a commendable manifestation of wise- 
dome and judgment, the good gifts and notable blessings of GOD, 
for the which we ought to be thankfull ; as also to yeeld due honour 
and praise unto him, for the noble order which he hath appointed in 
nature : praieng him to lighten our hearts with the beames of his 
wisedome, that we may more and more profit in the true knowledge 
of the workemanship of his hands. But some are so nise, that they 
condemne generallie all sorts of divinations, denieng those things 
that in nature have manifest causes, and are so framed, as they for- 
shew things to come, and in that shew admonish us of things after to 
insue, exhibiting signes of unknowne and future matters to be judged 
upon, by the order, lawe, and course of nature / proposed unto us by 
God. 
And some on the other side are so bewitched with follie, as they 
attribute to creatures that estimation, which rightlie and truelie 
apperteineth to God the creator of all things ; affirming that the 
publike and private destinies of all humane matters, and whatsoever 
a man would knowe of things come or gone, is manifested to us in the 
heavens : so as by the starres and planets all things might be 
knowne. These would also, that nothing should be taken in hand or 
gone about, without the favourable aspect of the planets. By which, 
and other the like devises they deprave and prophane the ancient and 
commendable observations of our forfathers : as did Colebrasus, who 
taught, that all mans life was governed by the seven planets ; and 
yet a christian, and condemned for heresie. But let us so farre foorth 
imbrace and allow this philosophie and prophesieng, as the word of 
God giveth us leave, and commendeth the same unto us. / 
167. 123. 
y. Wier. lib. 
de pycest. dtx- 
mon. 
All divina- 
tions are 
not con- 
demnable. 
168. 
Colebrasus 
erronious 
& impious 
opinion.

--- PAGE 234 ---
136 
9. Bookc. 
The discoverie 
124. 
Psalm. 13. 
Jerem. 54. 
Gen. I. 
Ezech. I. 
Gen. 9. 
Ecclus. 4?. 
Ps. 19. & 50. 
Ecclus. 43. 
Baruch. 3. 
i6g. 
Luk. ij, 24. 
["Mispr. saire.] 
Matt. 16. 2, 
3- 
Lactant. con- 
tra astrolo- 
gos. 
Peucer. de 
astrol. pag. 
383. 
The second Chapter, 
Proofes by the old arid new testament, that certaine observations 
of the weather are lawficll. 
:HEN God by his word and wisedome had made the 
heavens, and placed the starres in the firmament, he 
said ; Let them be for signes, and for seasons, and for 
daies, and yeares. When he created the rainebowe in 
the clouds, he said it should be for a signe and token unto us. 
Which we find true, not onelie of the floud past, but also of shewers 
to come. And therefore according to Jesus Sirachs advise, let us 
behold it, and praise him that made it. The prophet David saith ; 
The heavens declare the gloria of God, and the firmament sheweth 
his handle worke : dale unto dale uttereth the same, and night unto 
night teacheth knowledge. It is also written that bythecommandement 
of the holie one the starres are placed, and continue in their order, & 
faile not in their watch. It should appeare, that Christ himselfe did not 
altogither neglect the course & order of the heavens, in that he said ; 
When you see a/ cloud rise out of the west, streight waie you sale a 
shewer commeth : and so it is. And when you see the southwind 
blowe ; you saie it will be hot, and so it commeth to passe. Againe, 
when it is evening, you saie faire* weather, for the skie is red : and 
in the morning you saie, to dale shalbe a tempest, for the skie is red 
and lowring. Wherein as he noteth that these things doo trulie come 
to passe, according to ancient observation, and to the rule astro- 
nomicall : so doth he also by other words following admonish us, 
that in attending too much to those obsevations, we neglect not 
speciallie to follow our christian vocation. 
The physician is commended unto us, and allowed in the scriptures : 
but so to put trust in him, as to neglect & distrust God, is severelie 
forbidden and reproved. Surelie it is most necessarie for us to know 
and observe diverse rules astrologicall ; otherwise we could not with 
oportunitie dispatch our ordinarie affaires. And yet Lactantius con- 
demneth and recounteth it among the number of witchcrafts : from 
whose censure Calvine doth not much varie. The poore husbandman 
perceiveth that the increase of the moone maketh plants and living 
creatures frutefuU : so as in the full moone they are in best strength, 
decaieng in the wane, and in the conjunction doo utterlie wither 
and vade. Which when by observation, use and practise they 
have once learned, they distribute their businesse accordinglie ; as 
their times and seasons to sowe, to plant, to proine, to let their cattell 
bloud, to cut, &c./

--- PAGE 235 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 137 
The third Chapter. 
That certeine observations are indifferent, certeine ridiculous, and 
certeine impious, whence that cunning is derived of Apollo, and 
of Aruspices. 
KNOW not whether to disallow or discommend the 
curious observation used by our elders, who conjectured 
upon nativities : so as, if Saturne and Mercuric were 
opposite in anie brute signe, a man then borne should be 
dumbe or stammer much ; whereas it is dailie scene, that children 
naturallie imitate their parents/ conditions in that behalfe. Also they 
have noted, that one borne in the spring of the moone, shalbe 
healthie ; in that time of the wane, when the moone is utterlie decaied, 
the child then borne cannot live ; and in the conjunction, it cannot 
long continue. 
But I am sure the opinion of Julius Maternus is most impious, 
who writeth, that he which is borne when Saturne is in Leone, shall 
live long, and after his death shall go to heaven presentlie. And so 
is this of Albuniazar, who saith, that whosoever praieth to God, when 
the moone is in Capite draconis, shalbe heard, and obteine his praier. 
Furthermore, to plaie the cold prophet, as to recount it good or bad 
lucke, when salt or wine falleth on the table, or is shed, &c : or to 
prognosticate that ghests approch to your house, upon the chattering 
of pies or haggisters, wherof there can be yeelded no probable 
reason, is altogither vanitie and superstition : as hereafter shalbe 
more largelie shewed. But to make simple people beleeve, that a 
man or woman can foretell good or evill fortune, is meere witchcraft 
or cousenage. For God is the onlie searcher of the heart, and de- 
livereth not his counsell to so lewd reprobates. I know diverse 
writers affirme, that witches foretell things, as prompted by a reall 
divell ; and that he againe learneth it out of the prophesies written in 
the scriptures, and by other nimble sleights, wherein he passeth anie 
other creature earthlie ; and that the same divell, or some of his 
fellowes runnes or flies as farre as Rochester, to mother Bungle ; or to 
Canturburie to M. T ; or to Delphos, to Apollo ; or to Aesculapius, 
in Pargamo ; or to some other idoll or witch, and there by waie of 
oracle answers all questions, through his understanding of the pro- 
phesies conteined in the old testament, especiallie in Daniel and 
Esaie : whereby the divell knew of the translation of the monarchic 
from Babylon to Grcecia, &c. But either they have learned this of 
some oracle or witch ; or else I know not where the divell they find it. 
T 
125. 
The ridicu- 
lous art of 
nativitie- 
casting. 
/70. 
Julius Ma- 
ternus his 
most impi- 
ous opi- 
nion. 
Bodinus, 
Dancsus. 
Erastus. 
Hemingius. 
Mai. male/. 
Thorn. Aqui- 
nas, (Jc.

--- PAGE 236 ---
138 9- Booke. 
The discoverie 
Marrie certeine it is, that herein they shew themselves to be witches 
and fond divinors : for they find no such thing written in Gods 
word. 
Of the idoll called Apollo, I have somewhat alreadie spoken in 
the former title of Ob or Pytho ; and some occasion I shall have 
to speake thereof hereafter : and therfore at this time it shall 
suffice to tell you, that the credit gained thereunto, was by the craft / 
n^- and cunning of the priests, which tended thereupon ; who with their 
126. counterfeit miracles so/ bewitched the people, as they thought such 
vertue to have beene conteined in the bodies of those idols, as God 
hath not promised to anie of his angels, or elect people. For it is 
Apoiios said, that if Apollo were in a chafe, he would sweat : if he had 
passions. remorsc to the afflicted, and could not help them, he would shed 
teares, which I beleeve might have beene wiped awaie with that 
handkerchiefe, that wiped and dried the Rood of graces face, being 
in like perplexities. Even as another sort of witching priests called 
Aruspices, prophesied victorie to Alexander, bicause an eagle lighted 
on his head : which eagle might (I beleeve) be cooped or caged with 
Mahomets dove, that picked peason out of his eare. 
What pro- 
phesies al- 
lowable. 
J. Bod. lib. de 
depm. lib I. „ 
caj-. 4. ''/^• 
The fourth Chapter. 
The predictions of soothsaiers and lewd priests, the prognostications 
of astronomers and physicians allowable, divine prophesies holie 
and good. 
HE cousening tricks of oracling priests and monkes, are 
and have beene speciallie most abhominable. The super- 
stitious observations of sensles augurors and soothsaiers 
(contrarie to philosophic, and without authoritie of scrip- 
ture) are verie ungodlie and ridiculous. Howbeit, I reject not the 
prognostications of astronomers, nor the conjectures or forewarnings 
of physicians, nor yet the interpretations of philosophers ; although 
in respect of the divine prophesies conteined in holie scriptures, they 
are not to be weighed or regarded. For the end of these and the 
other is not onlie farre differing ; but whereas these conteine onlie 
the word and will of God, with the other are mingled most horrible 
lies and cousenages. For though there may be many of them learned 
and godlie, yet lurke there in corners of the same profession, a great 
number of counterfets and couseners. f. Bodin putteth this differ- 
ence betweene divine prophets and inchantors ;/ to wit, the one saith 
alwaies true, the others words (proceeding from the divell) are 
alwaies false ; or for one truth they tell a hundred lies, And then

--- PAGE 237 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 5. 139 
why maie not everie witch be thought as cunning as Apollol And 
why not everie counterfet cousener as good a witch as mother Bungie'^. 
For it is ods, but they will hit the truth once in a hundred divinations 
as well as the best. 
The fift Chapter. 
The diversitie of true prophets, of Urint, and of the propheticall 
use of the twelve precioits stones conteifted therein, of the divine 
voice called Eccho. 
T should appeare, that even of holie prophets there were 
diverse sorts. For David and Salojnon, although in 
their psalmes and parables are conteined most excellent 
mysteries, and notable allegories : yet they were not indued 
with that degree of prophesie, that Elie and Elisha were, &c./ For as 
often as it is said, that God spake to David or Salotnon, it is meant 
to be done by the prophets. For Nathan or Gad were the messengers 
and prophets to reveale Gods will to David. And Ahiam the Silo- 
nite was sent from God to Salomon. Item, the spirit of prophesie, 
which Elias had, was doubled upon Elisha. Also some prophets 
prophesied all their lives, some had but one vision, and some had 
more, according to Gods pleasure ; yea some prophesied unto the 
people of such things as came not to passe, and that was where Gods 
wrath was pacified by repentance. But these prophets were alwaies 
reputed among the people to be wise and godlie ; whereas the heathen 
prophets were evermore knowne and said to be mad and foolish : as 
it is written both of the prophets of Sibylla, and also of Apollo ; and 
at this dale also in the Indies, &c. 
But that anie of these extraordinarie gifts remaine at this daie, 
Bodin, nor anie witchmonger in the world shall never be able to 
proove : though he in his booke of divelish madnesse would make 
men beleeve it. For these were miraculouslie mainteined/ by God 
among the Jewes, who were instructed by them of all such things as 
should come to passe ; or else informed by Uriin : so as the preests 
by the brightnes of the twelve pretious stones conteined therein, 
could prognosticate or expound anie thing. Which brightnes and 
vertue ceased (as fosephtis reporteth) two hundred yeares before he 
was borne. So as since that time, no answers were yelded thereby 
of Gods will and pleasure. Nevertheles, the Hebrues write, that 
there hath beene ever since that time, a divine voice heard among 
them, which in Latine is called Filia vocis, in Greeke ^x"^? 
English The daughter of speech. 
Diverse de- 
grees of 
prophesie. 12' 
2. Reg. 2. 
J. Bodin. 
173- 
Joseph, de an- 
iiquit. 
Josue filius 
Levi. lib. 
Pirheaboth.

--- PAGE 238 ---
140 
q. Booke. 
The discoverie 
The sixt Chapter. 
Phophesies 
conditio- 
nal!. 
Of prophesies conditionall : whereof the prophesies in the old 
testament doo inireate, and by whom they were published ; witch- 
mongers atinswers to the objections agaifist witches sttperfiaturall 
actions. 
HRIST and his apostles prophesied of the calamities and 
afflictions, which shall greeve and disturbe the church of 
God in this life : also of the last dale, and of the signes 
and tokens that shall be shewed before that dale : and 
finallie of all things, which are requisite for us to foreknowe. How- 
beit, such is the mercie of God, that all prophesies, threatnings, 
plagues, and punishments are annexed to conditions of repentance : 
as on the other side, corporall blessings are tied under the condition 
of the crosse and castigation. So as by them the mysteries of our 
salvation being discovered unto us, we are not to seeke new signes and 
miracles ; but to attend to the doctrine of the apostles, who preached 
Christ exhibited and crucified for our sinnes, his resurrection, ascen- 
sion, and thereby the redemption of as manie as beleeve, &c. 
The prophesies in the old testament treat of the continuance, the 
governement, and the difference of estates : of the distinction of the 
foure monarchies, of their order, decaie, and instauration ;/ of the 
changes and/ ruines pf the kingdomes of fitda, Israel, Aegypt, Persia, 
GrcEcia, St'c : and speciallie of the comming of our Saviour Jesus 
Christ ; and how he should be borne of a virgine, and where, of his 
tribe, passion, resurrection, &c. These prophesies were published 
by Gods speciall and peculiar prophets, endued with his particular 
and excellent gifts, according to his promise ; I will raise them up a 
prophet out of the midst of their brethren, I will put my words in his 
mouth, &c. Which though it were speciallie spoken of Christ, yet 
was it also spoken of those particular prophets, which were placed 
among them by God to declare his will ; which were also figures of 
Christ the prophet himselfe. Now, if prophesie be an extraordinarie 
gift of God, and a thing peculiar to himselfe, as without whose speciall 
assistance no creature can be a prophet, or shew what is to come ; 
whie should we beleeve, that those lewd persons can performe by 
divinations and miracles that which is not in humane but in divine 
power to accomplish ? 
Howbeit, when I denie that witches can ride in the aire, and the 
miraculous circumstance thereof : by and by it is objected unto me, 
1. Keg. 2. 13. that Enoch and Elie were rapt into heaven bodilie ; and that Abacuke 
174. 
The subject 138. 
of the pro- 
phesies of 
the old te- 
stament.

--- PAGE 239 ---
of Witchcraft. Chap. 7. I 4- 1 
was carried in the aire, to feed Daniel : and so falselie oppose a divels 
or a witches power against the vertue of the Holy-ghost. If I deride 
the poets opinions, saieng, that witches cannot Cwlo deducere hiriam, 
fetch the moone from heaven, &c: they tell me that at Joshuas battell 
the sunne staled, and at the passion of Christ there was palpable 
darknes. If I denie their cunning in the exposition of dreames, ad- 
vising them to remember Jeremies counsell, not to followe or credit 
the expositors of dreames ; they hit me in the teeth with Da)iiel and 
Joseph : for that the one of them expounded Pharao the Persian 
kings, the other Nabuchadnez-zar the Aegyptian kings dreame. If I 
sale with Salomon, that the dead knowe nothing, and that the Eccies. 9, 5. 
dead knowe us not, neither are remooveable out of Abrahams 
bosome, &c : they produce the storie of Samuel : wherein, I sale, i. Sam. 28. 
they set the power of a creature as high as the creator. If I sale, 
that these witches cannot transubstantiate themselves, nor others 
into beasts, &c. they cite the storie of Nabiichadnez-zar ; as though 
indeed he were made a materiall beast, and that also by witch-/ 
craft ; and strengthen that their assertion with the fables of Circe and 775. 
Ulysses his companions, &c. 
The seventh Chapter. 
What were the miracles expressed in the old testament, and what 
are they in the new testament : and that we are not now to looke 
Jor anie more fniracles. 
HE miracles expressed in the old testament were manie, 
but the end of them all was one, though they were divers 
and differing in shew : as where the sacrifices of Moses, 
Elias, and Salomon, being abundantlie wet were burnt 
with fier from heaven, &c. The varietie of toongs at the building of Gen. n, 6. 
Babylon, Isaachs birth of Sarah being by nature past children,/ the oan. Vi. 129. 
passage through the red sea, Daniels foretelling of the foure 
monarchies, in the fourth whereof he apparantlie foresheweth the 
comming of the Lord. All these, and manie other, which are expressed 
in the old testament, were mercifull instructions and notable miracles 
to strengthen the faith of Gods people in their Messias. If you had 
gone to Delphos, Apollo would have made you beleeve with his 
amphibologicall answers, that he could have foretold you all these 
things. 
The miracles wrought by Christ were the raising up of the dead A summe 
(which manie would impute to the woman of Endor, and also to our tirades.' 
witches and conjurors) the restoring of the lame to lims, the blind to

--- PAGE 240 ---
9- Booke. 
The discoverie 
sight, the dumbe to speach, and finallie the healing of all diseases ; 
which manie beleeve our witches can doo ; yea, and as they them- 
selves will take it upon them. As for casting out of divels (which 
was another kind of miracles usuall with Christ) witches and con- 
jurors are said to be as good thereat as ever he was : and yet, if you 
will beleeve Christs words, it cannot be so. For he saith ; Everie 
kingdome divided against it selfe, shall be brought to naught, &c. If 
sathan cast out sathan, he is divided, &c : and his kingdome shall not 
endure, &c./ 
Peters chaines fell off in prison, so did Richard Gallisies fetters at 
Windsor : marrie the prison doores opened not to Richard, as they 
did to Peter. Helias by speciall grace obtained raine, our witches 
can make it raine, when they list, &c. But sithens Christ did these 
miracles, and manie more, and all to confirme his truth, and strengthen 
our faith, and finallie for the conversion of the people (as appeareth 
in John. 6. 7, and 12 : in so much as he vehementlie reprooved such, 
as upon the sight of them would not beleeve, saieng ; Wo be to thee 
Chorazin, wo be to thee Bethsaida. If the miracles had beene doone in 
Tyre and Sidon, which have beene doone in you, they had a great while 
ago repented, &c. Let us settle and acquiet our faith in Christ, and 
beleeving all his wonderous works, let us reject these old wives fables, 
as lieng vanities : whereof you may find in the golden legend, M. Mai. 
and speciallie in Bodin miraculous stuffe, enough to checke all the 
miracles expressed in the old and new testament ; which are of more 
credit with manie bewitched people, than the true miracles of 
Christ himselfe. Insomuch as they stand in more awe 
of the manacies of a witch, than of all the 
threatnings and cursses pronounced 
by God, and expressed in his 
word. And thus much 
touching the word 
JCasam.j /

