lor om7ie revelai : 339. 
What thinf; soever snowe dooth hide, 
Heat of the sunne dooth make it spide. 
A ndrceas 
Gartner us 
Maricerfion- 
tamis. Eng. 
by Ab. Fie. 
And according to the verdict of Christ, the true Nazarite, who never 
told untruth, but who is the substance and groundworke of 
truth it selfe, saieng ; Nihil est tarn occultum quod 
non sit detegendum, Nothing is 
so secret, but it shall 
be knowne and 
revealed./ 
Matt. 10, 26. 
Mark 4 22. 
Luke. 8, 17. 
*And. 12, 2, 
[* =and]

--- PAGE 494 ---
396 i6. Buoke. The discoverie 
470. 
Tf Tke xvi. booke. 
The first Chapter. 
The com- 
pilers or 
m^ikers of 
the booke 
called A 
Mallet to 
braine wit- 
ches. 
No marvel 
that they 
were so o- 
pinionative 
herein, for 
God gave 
ii 
A conclusion, in vianer of an epilog, repeating fnanie of the fortner 
absurdities of ivitchtnongers conceipts, cotifutations thereof and 
of the authoritie of fames Sprenger and Henrie Institor in- 
quisitors and compilers of M. Mai. 
ITHERTO you have had delivered unto you, that which 
[ have conceived and gathered of this matter. In the 
substance and principall parts wherof I can see no 
difference among the writers heereupon ; of what coun- 
trie, condition, estate, or religion so ever they be ; but I find almost 
all of them to agree in unconstancie, fables, and impossibilities ; 
scratching out of M. Mai. the substance of all their arguments : so 
as their authors being disapproved, they must coine new stuffe, or go 
to their grandams maids to learne more old wives tales, whereof this 
art of witchcraft is contrived. But you must know that fames 
Sprenger, and Henrie Institor, whome I have had occasion to alledge 
manie times, were coparteners in the composition of that profound 
& learned booke called Malleus Malefcarum, & -wGre the greatest 
doctors of that art : out of whom I have gathered matter and absur- 
ditie enough, to confound the opinions conceived of witchcraft ; 
although they were allowed inquisitors and assigned by the pope, 
with the authoritie and commendation of all the doctors of the 
^7/. universitie of Colleji, &c : to call before/ them, to imprison, to con- 
demne, and to execute witches ; and finallie to seaze and confiscate 
their goods./ 
340. These two doctors, to mainteine their their* credit, and to cover their 
injuries, have published those same monsterous lies, which have 
abused all Christendome, being spread abroad with such authoritie, 
as it will be hard to suppresse the credit of their writings, be tliey 
never so ridiculous and false. Which although they mainteine and 
stirre up with their owne praises ; yet men are so bewitched, as to 
give credit unto them. For proofe whereof I remember they write in 
one place of their said booke, that by reason of their severe pro- 
ceedings against witches, they suffered intollerable assaults, speciallie 
in the night, many times finding needdels sticking in their biggens.

--- PAGE 495 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 2. 
which were thither conveied by witches charmes : and through their them over 
innocencie and holinesse (they saie) they were ever miraculouslie de'iusions.^ 
preserved from hurt. Howbeit they affirme that they will not tell all 
that might make to the manifestation of their holines : for then should 
their owne praise stinke in their owne mouthes. And yet God knoweth 
their whole booke conteineth nothing but stinking lies and poperie. 
Which groundworke and foundation how weake and wavering it is, 
how unlike to continue, and how slenderlie laid, a child may soone 
discerne and perceive. 
The second Chapter, 
By what meattes the common people have beene made beleeve in 
the miraculous works of witches, a definition of witchcraft, 
and a description thereof. 
[HE common people have beene so assotted and bewitched, 
with whatsoever poets have feigned of witchcraft, either 
in earnest, in jest, or else in derision ; and with whatso- 
ever lowd liers and couseners for their pleasures heerein 
have invented, and with whatsoever tales they have heard from old 
doting women, or from their mothers maids, and with whatsoever the 
grandfoole/ their ghostlie father, or anie other morrow masse preest 47^- 
had informed them ; and finallie with whatsoever they have swallowed 
up through tract of time, or through their owne timerous nature or 
ignorant conceipt, concerning these matters of hagges and witches : 
as they have so settled their opinion and credit thereupon, that they 
thinke it heresie to doubt in anie part of the matter ; speciallie 
bicause they find this word witchcraft expressed in the scriptures ; 
which is as to defend praieng to saincts, bicause Sancttis, Sanctus, 
Sanctus is written in Te Deum. 
And now to come to the definition of witchcraft, which hitherto I T^^ defini- 
tion or de- 
did deferre and put off purposelie : that you might perceive the true scription of 
nature thereof, by the circumstances, and therefore the rather to allow witchcraft, 
of the same, seeing the varietie of other writers. Witchcraft is in 
truth a cousening art, wherin the name of God is abused, prophaned 
and blasphemed, and his power attributed to a vile creature. In 
estimation of the vulgar people, it is a supernaturall worke, contrived 
betweene a corporall old woman, and a spirituall divell. The maner 
thereof is so secret, mysticall,/ and strange, that to this dale there hath 
never beene any credible witnes therof It is incomprehensible to 
the wise, learned or faithfull ; a probable matter to children, foples. 
The formal 
cause. 
341.

--- PAGE 496 ---
398 
i6. Hooke. 
The disc over? e 
The finaii melancholike persons and papists. The trade is thought to be im- 
pious. The effect and end thereof to be sometimes evil), as when 
thereby man or beast, grasse, trees, or corne, &c ; is hurt : sometimes 
good, as whereby sicke folkes are healed, theeves bewraied, and true 
The mate- j^gn come to their goods, &c. The matter and instruments, where- 
riall cause. o i 
With It IS accomplished, are words, charmes, signes, images, characters, 
&c : the which words although any other creature doo pronounce, in 
maner and forme as they doo, leaving out no circumstance requisite 
or usuall for that action : yet none is said to have the grace or gift to 
performe the matter, except she be a witch, and so taken, either by 
hir owne consent, or by others imputation./ 
473- 
The third Chapter, 
A necessa- 
rie sequele. 
Probatum 
est, by mo- 
ther Bun- 
gles con- 
fessio that 
al witches 
are couse- 
ners. 
Reasons to proove that •words and characters are bid babies, &f 
that witches cannot doo such things as the tmtltitude stipposeth 
they can, their greatest woonders prooved trifles, of a yoong 
gentleman consened. 
|[HAT words, characters, images, and such other trinkets, 
which are thought so necessarie instruments for witch- 
craft (as without the which no such thing can be 
accomplished) are but babies, devised by couseners, to 
abuse the people withal! ; I trust I have sufficientlie prooved. And 
the same maie be further and more plainelie perceived by these short 
and compendious reasons following. 
First, in that the Tnrkes and infidels, in their witchcraft, use both 
other words, and other characters than our witches doo, and also such 
as are most contrarie. In so much as, if ours be bad, in reason theirs 
should be good. If their witches can doo anie thing, ours can doo 
nothing. For as our witches are said to renounce Christ, and despise 
his sacraments : so doo the other forsake Mahomet, and his lawes, 
which is one large step to christianitie. 
It is also to be thought, that all witches are couseners ; when 
mother Biotgie, a principall witch, so reputed, tried, and condemned 
of all men, and continuing in that exercise and estimation mania 
yeares (having cousened «&; abused the whole realme, in so much as 
there came to hir, witchmongers from all the furthest parts of the 
land, she being in diverse bookes set out with authoritie, registred and 
chronicled by the name of the great witch of Rochester, and reputed 
among all men for the cheefe ringleader of all other witches) by good

--- PAGE 497 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 3. 399 
proofe is found to be a meere cousener ; confessing in hir death bed 
freelie, without compulsion or inforcement, that hir cunning consisted 
onlie in deluding and deceiving the people : saving that she had 
(towards the maintenance of hir credit in that cousening trade) some 
sight in physicke and surgerie, and the assistance of a freend of hirs,/ 342. 
cal/led Hero7t, a professor thereof And this I know, partlie of mine 474- 
owne knowledge, and partlie by the testimonie of hir husband, and 
others of credit, to whome (I sale) in hir death bed, and at sundrie 
other times she protested these things ; and also that she never had 
indeed anie materiall spirit or divell (as the voice went) nor yet knew 
how to worke anie supernaturall matter, as she in hir life time made 
men beleeve she had and could doo. 
The like may be said of one T. of Canttirburie, whose name I will 
not litterallie discover, who wonderfullie abused manie in these parts, 
making them thinke he could tell where anie thing lost became : with 
diverse other such practises, whereby his fame was farre beyond the 
others. And yet on his death bed he confessed, that he knew nothing 
more than anie other, but by slight and devises, without the assistance 
of anie divell or spirit, saving the spirit of cousenage : and this did 
he (I sale) protest before manie of great honestie, credit, & wisedome, 
who can witnesse the same, and also gave him good commendations 
for his godlie and honest end. 
Againe, who will mainteine, that common witchcrafts are not 
cousenages, when the great and famous witchcrafts, which had stolne 
credit not onlie from all the common people, but from men of great 
wisdome and authoritie, are discovered to be beggerlie slights of 
cousening varlots ? Which otherwise might and would have remained ,. . 
... J. Hodin in 
a perpetuall objection against me. Were there not * three images the preface 
of late yeeres found in a doonghill, to the terror & astonishment of booke of^ 
manie thousands 1 In so much as great matters were thought to 
° ° ma 
have beene pretended to be doone by witchcraft. But if the Lord porteth 
preserve those persons (whose destruction was doubted to have beene co'njurm^g 
intended therby) from all other the lewd practises and attempts of ^"^^^^j J,^'*' 
their enimies ; I feare not, but they shall easilie withstand these and Islington: 
such like devises, although they should indeed be practised against .g^g^^^jl;^]" 
them. But no doubt, if such babies could have brought those matters 
of mischeefe to passe, by the hands of traitors, witches, or papists ; the place 
we should long since have beene deprived of the most excellent understad 
jewell and comfort that we enjoy in this world. Howbeit, I confesse, Latine. 
that the feare, conceipt, and doubt of such mischeefous pretenses may 
breed inconvenience to them that stand in awe of the/ same. And I 47.5. 
wish, that even for such practises, though they never can or doo take 
effect, the practisers be punished with all extremitie : bicause therein 
mono- 
viatiia re-

--- PAGE 498 ---
400 
i6. Booke. 
The discove7'ie 
Note this 
devise of 
the waxen 
images 
found of 
late neere 
London. 
is manifested a traiterous heart to the Queene, and a presumption 
against God. 
But to returne to the discoverie of the aforesaid knaverie and 
witchcraft. So it was that one old cousener, wanting monie, devised 
or rather practised (for it is a stale devise) to supplie his want, by 
promising a yoong Gentleman, whose humor he thought would that 
waie be well served, that for the summe of fourtie pounds, he would 
not faile by his cunning in that art of witchcraft, to procure unto him 
the love of anie three women whome he would name, and of whome 
he should make choise at his pleasure. The yoong Gentleman being 
abused with his cunning devises, and too hastilie yeelding to that 
motion, satisfied this cunning mans demand of monie. Which, 
bicause he had it not presentlie to disbursse, provided it for him at 
343. the/ hands of a freend of his. Finallie, this cunning man made the 
three puppets of wax, &c : leaving nothing undone that appertained 
to the cousenage, untill he had buried them, as you have heard. But 
I omit to tell what a doo was made herof, and also what reports and 
lies were bruted ; as what white dogs and blacke dogs there were 
scene in the night season passing through the watch, mawgre all their 
force and preparation against them, &c. But the yoong Gentleman, 
who for a litle space remained in hope mixed with joy and love, now 
through tract of time hath those his felicities powdered with doubt 
and despaire. For in steed of atchieving his love, he would gladlie 
have obteined his monie. But bicause he could by no meanes get 
either the one or the other (his monie being in hucksters handling, 
and his sute in no better forwardnes) he revealed the whole matter, 
hoping by that meanes to recover his monie ; which he neither can 
yet get againe, nor hath paied it where he borrowed. But till triall was 
had of his simplicitie or rather follie herein, he received some trouble 
himselfe hereabouts, though now dismissed./ 
476. 
The fourth Chapter. 
A strange 
miracle, if 
it were 
tnie. 
Of one that was so bewitched that he could read no scriptures 
but canonicall, of a divel that could speake no Latitie, a proof e 
that witchcraft is fiat cousenage. 
fERE I may aptlie insert another miracle of importance, 
that happened within the compasse of a childes remem- 
brance, which may induce anie resonable bodie to 
conceive, that these supernaturall actions are but fables 
& cousenages. There was one, whom for some respects I name not.

--- PAGE 499 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 5. 401 
that was taken blind, deafe, & dumbe ; so as no physician could 
helpe him. That man (forsooth) though he was (as is said) both 
blind, dumbe & deafe. yet could he read anie canonicall scriptures ; 
but as for apocrypha, he could read none : wherein a Gods name 
consisted the miracle. But a leafe of apocrypha being extraordinarilie There the 
inserted among the canonicall scriptures, he read the same as was°over- 
authentike : wherein his knaverie was bewraied. Another had a "Jflf^'f?'' 
. . all his dis- 
divell, that answered men to all questions, marie hir divell could sembied 
understand no Latine, and so was she (and by such meanes all the S''^^'"^' 
rest may be) bewraied. Indeed our witching writers saie, that 
certeine divels speake onelie the language of that countrie where they 
are resiant, as French, or English, &c. 
Furthermore, in my conceipt, nothing prooveth more apparentlie 
that witchcraft is cousenage, and that witches instruments are but 
ridiculous babies, and altogither void of effect ; than when learned 
and godlie divines, in their serious writings, produce experiments as 
wrought by witches, and by divels at witches commandements : which 
they expound by miracles, although indeed meere trifles. Whereof 
they conceive amisse, being overtaken with credulitie.// 
The fift Chapter. 
477- 
344. 
Of the divination by the sive and sheeres, and by the booke and 
key, Hemingius his opinion thereof confuted, a bable to know 
what is a clocke, of certeine juglijtg knacks, manifold reasotis 
for the overthrowe of witches and conjurors, and their cousen- 
ages, of the divels transformations, of Ferrum candens* Sr'c. 
O passe over all the fables, which are vouched by the popish 
[* Latin in Ital.] 
doctors, you shall heare the words of JV. I/emingius, Heming. in 
whose zeale & learning otherwise I might justlie commend : magici"f^"^' 
 howbeit I am sorie and ashamed to see his ignorance and 
follie in this behalfe. Neither would I have bewraied it, but that he 
himselfe, among other absurdities concerning the maintenance of 
witches omnipotencie, hath published it to his great discredit. 
Popish preests (saith he) as the Chaldsans used the divination by 
sive & sheeres* for the detection of theft, doo practise with a psalter [« p. 262] 
and a keie fastned upon the 49. psalme, to discover a theefe. And 
when the names of the suspected persons are orderlie put into the 
pipe of the keie, at the reading of these words of the psalme [If thou 
sawest a theefe thou diddest consent unto him]t the booke will [t [] in text]

--- PAGE 500 ---
402 
if). Dooke. 
The discoverie 
The grea- 
test clarkes 
are not the 
wisest men. 
418. 
A naturall 
reason of 
the former 
knacke. 
345. 
[* p.J^6.] 
C. Agrifp. in 
lib. de vanit. 
scient. £^ z« 
epistola ante 
lib rum de 
occulta fhi- 
losophia. 
wagge, and fall out of the fingers of them that hold it, and he 
whose name remaineth in the keie must be the theefe. Hereupon 
Hejuingws inferreth, that although conjuring preests and witches 
bring not this to passe by the absolute words of the psalme, which 
tend to a farre other scope ; yet sathan dooth nimblie, with his in- 
visible hand, give such a twitch to the booke, as also in the other 
case to the sive and the sheeres, that downe falles the booke and keie, 
sive and sheeres, up starts the theefe, and awaie runneth the divell 
laughing, &c. 
But alas, Heminghis is deceived, as not perceiving the conceipt, or 
rather the deceipt hereof. For where he supposeth those actions to 
be miraculous, and done by a divell ; they are in truth/ meere babies, 
wherein consisteth not so much as legierdemaine. For everie carter 
may conceive the slight hereof : bicause the booke and keie, sive and 
sheeres, being staied up in that order, by naturall course, of necessitie 
must within that space (by meanes of the aire, and the pulse beating 
at the fingers end) turne and fall downe. Which experience being 
knowne to the witch or conjuror, she or he doc forme and frame their 
prophesie accordinglie : as whosoever maketh proofe thereof shall 
manifestlie perceive it. By this art, practise, or experience, you shall 
knowe what it is a clocke, if you hold betweene your finger and your 
thumbe a thred of six or seven inches long, unto the other end whereof 
is tied a gold ring, or some such like thing : in such sort as upon the 
beating of your pulse, and the mooving of the ring, the same may 
strike upon either side of a goblet or glasse. These things are (I 
confesse) witchcraft, bicause the effect or event proceedeth not of 
that cause which such couseners sale, and others beleeve they doo. 
As when they laie a medicine for the ague, &c : to a childs wrists, 
they also pronounce certeine words or charmes, by vertue whereof 
(they saie)/ the child is healed : whereas indeed the medicine onelie 
dooth the feate. And this is also a sillie jugglers knacke, which 
wanteth legierdemaine, whom you shall see to thrust a pinne, or a 
small knife, through the head and braine of a chicken or pullet, and 
with certeine mysticall words seenne to cure him:* whereas, though no 
such words were spoken, the chicken would live, and doo well enough ; 
as experience teacheth and declareth. 
Againe, when such as have mainteined the art and profession of 
conjuring, and have written thereupon most cunninglie, have published 
recantations, and confessed the deceipts thereof, as Cornelius Agrippa 
did, whie should we defend it? Also, when heathen princes, of great 
renowne, authoritie, & learning, have searched, with much Industrie 
and charge, the knowledge & secrecie of conjuration and witchcraft, 
& finallie found by experience all to be false and vaine that is reported

--- PAGE 501 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 5. 
of them, as Nero, Jtiliamis apostata, and Valence did ; whie should 
we seeke for further triall, to proove witchcraft and conjuration to be 
cousenage ? 
Also, when the miracles imputed unto them, exceed in quantitie, 
qualitie and number, all the miracles that Christ wrought here upon 
earth, for the establishing of his gospell, for the confir/mation of our 
faith, and for the advancement of his glorious name ; what good 
christian will beleeve them to be true ? And when Christ himselfe 
saith ; The works that I doo, no man else can accomplish ; whie 
should we thinke that a foolish old woman can doo them all, and 
manie more? 
Also, when Christ knew not these witches, nor spake one word of 
them in all the time of his being here upon earth, having such necessarie 
occasion (if at leastwise they with their familiars could doo as he did 
by the spirit of God, as is constantlie affirmed) whie should we sup- 
pose that they can doo as they sale, but rather that they are de- 
ceivers[?*] When they are faine to saie, that witches wrought not in that 
art, all those thirtie three yeares that Christ lived, and that there were 
none in Jobs time, and that the cousening oracles are now ceased ; 
who seeth not that they are witlesse, and madde fooles that mainteine 
it ? When all the mischeefes are accomplished by poisons and 
naturall meanes, which they affirme to be brought to passe by words, 
it manifesteth to the world their cousenage. When all the places of 
scripture, which witchmongers allowe for the proofe of such witches, 
are prooved to make nothing for their purpose, their own fables & 
lies deserve small credit. When one of the cheefe points in con- 
troversie ; to wit, execution of witches, is grounded upon a false 
translation ; namelie. You shall not suffer a witch to live (which is 
in Latine,t Veneficain nan retinebitis in vita) where the word in 
everie mans eare soundeth to be a poisoner, rather than a worker 
of miracles, and so interpreted by the seventie interpreters, Josephus^ 
and almost of all the Rabbins, which were Hebrues borne : whie 
should anie of their interpretations or allegations be trusted, or 
well accounted of ? When working of miracles is ceased, and the 
gift of prophesie also ; so as the godlie, through invocation of the 
holie spirit, cannot performe such wonderfull things, as these 
witches and conjurors by the invocation of divels and wicked 
spirits undertake, and are said to doo ; what man that knoweth 
and honoureth God will be so in/fatuate as to beleeve these lies, 
and so preferre the power of witches and divels before the godlie 
endued with Gods holie spirit ? When manie printed bookes are 
published, even with authoritie, in confirmation of such miracles 
wrought by those couseners, for the detection of witchcraft and 
PUn. lib. 
natural, hist, 
30. cap. I. 
Pet. Mart, 
in locis com- 
munibus. 
479- 
[* text (.)] 
Note that 
during all 
Christs 
time up- 
on earth, 
which was 
33. yeares, 
witches 
were put 
to silence, 
&c. 
[t Not inVulg.] 
346. 
480.

--- PAGE 502 ---
404 
1 6. Bookc. 
TJie discoverie 
V = crack] 
[• Cf. p. 9/.] 
But Christs 
argument 
was un- 
doubted : 
Ergo, (ac. 
I marvel 1 
for what 
purpose the 
magistrate 
went to that 
fellowes 
house. 
Albertus 
Crantzius in 
lib. 4. 7netrO' 
fclis. cap. 4. 
Prcv. 6. 
481. 
Mai. male/, 
par, 2, quir. 1 
cap. 9. 
in fine all is not onelie found false, and to have beene accomplished 
by cousenage, but that there hath beene therein a set purpose to 
defame honest matrones, as to make them be thought to be witches : 
whie should we beleeve Bodin, M. Mai. : in their cousening 
tales and fables ? When they saie that witches can flie in the aire, 
and come in at a little coane,* or a hole in a glasse windowe, and 
steale awaie sucking children, and hurt their mothers ; and yet when 
they are brought into prison, they cannot escape out of the grate, 
which is farre bigger : who will not condemne such accusations or 
confessions to be frivolous, &c ? When (if their assertions were true) 
concerning the divels usuall taking of shapes, and walking, talking, 
conferring, hurting, and all maner of dealing with mortall creatures, 
Christs argument to Thomas had beene weake and easilie answered ; 
yea the one halfe, or all the whole world might be inhabited by divels, 
everie poore mans house might be hired over his head by a divell, he 
might take the shape and favor of an honest woman, and plaie the 
witch ; or of an honest man, and plaie the theefe, and so bring them 
both, or whome he list to the gallowes : who seeth not the vanitie of 
such assertions? For then the divell might in the likenes of an 
honest man commit anie criminall offense ; as Lavater in his nine- 
teenth chapter De spectris reporteth of a grave wise magistrate in the 
territorie of Tigjtrie, who affirmed, that as he and his servant went 
through certeine pastures, he espied in a morning, the divell in 
likenes of one whome he knew verie well, wickedlie dealing with a 
mare. Upon the sight whereof he immediatlie went to that fellowes 
house, and certeinlie learned there, that the same person went not out 
of his chamber that daie. And if he had not wiselie boolted out the 
matter, the good honest man (saith h