milar 
are his errors as to Haias and Sedaias, for at one time he speaks of 
Rabbi Sedaias Haias, repeating it also at the last when he gives his 
" forren authors" consulted, and between these speaks of them as two 
persons, as they were. More especially would I call attention to his 
blunders as to Argerius Ferrerius. He quotes him— yet he is always 
Ferr^rius — five times in his text, twice in his table of contents, and 
once in his "authors used". So in his translation from him, the "s" of

--- PAGE 46 ---
XXXVl 
Introdiution. 
" verbis" being indistinct in some copies, he read the word as "verbi", 
and thereby translated the sentence into such unmistakable non- 
sense that this alone should have shown him his error. So, also, we 
have the senseless, because careless, rendering of the sword in hand 
passage, p. 257 ; and with these may be classed his adoption of 
T. R.'s curious mistranslations from Wier's Pseudomonarchia, or from 
another copy of the Einpto. Salomonis, for a moment's consideration 
would have shown him their absurdity, and led him to turn to Wier. 
In p. 19 also, we find "infants" where, as stated in my note, all the 
editions of the Mai. Male/, in the British Museum have " infames"; 
and this, though a slip of memory, betokens, when taken with the rest, 
overhaste. These slips, in an ordinary writer, would lead to another 
conclusion, but not in this case, where we have evidence of both 
ordinary and recondite knowledge, of conclusions tried by actual 
experiment, of a quick and intelligent perception, and of what may 
be called, in a good sense, a ready and acute subtlety in refuting or 
retorting allegations or objections. 
Our author's indebtedness to Cornelius Agrippa and to Wier has, 
in a great measure, been anticipated in what has been said; but a few 
words may here be added. Casually coming across their books when he 
became a reader of out-of-the-way works, he did not become a follower 
of theirs, and then write a book, as the disciples of Pythagoras wrote 
books to expound and hand down the doctrines of their master. Wier 
had written a book against witchcraft, and a clear and comprehensive 
book. But while Scot certainly followed Wier in point of time, and 
as certainly was much indebted to him for the perfecting of his book, 
yet, as 1 have said, Scot seems to have taken up his belief against 
the reality of witchcraft from what he in his own experience had 
witnessed ; and my view, that he was then led to read Wier and 
Cornelius Agrippa, and the writers on the other side, seems to me con- 
firmed by what we find as to his indebtedness to Wier. The " Not- 
ings on Wier" show that, while he copied him in some other instances, 
he borrowed from him mainly a long list of illustrations, some of which 
even he may have drawn independently from the same sources as did 
Wier. 
Bibliography. — We do not find an entry of Scot's Hoppe-garden 
in the Stationers' Registers, because the entries about 1574 are want-

--- PAGE 47 ---
Introduction. 
xxxvii 
ing. But why do we not find so large and important a book as the 
Witchcraft of 1584 so entered, the writer being of a family of no mean 
repute, and the head of his house, Sir Th. Scot, being in those days 
a man of some mark ? The answer, after what has been said, is 
simple. He upheld and defended a heresy, the existence and dia- 
bolical powers and practices of witches being believed in and guarded 
against, by the Queen, the bishops, and the people. Hence the reply 
of the Stationers' Company would most certainly have been — the same 
as in more trifling cases — " provided he shall get the bishop of Lon- 
don his alowance to yt", words which, under the circumstances, 
would have been a refusal, and a refusal which, had any steps been 
taken against him after its publication, would have told against him. 
Hence he resolved to print it, taking all the blame and responsibility 
on his own shoulders, no stationer's name being connected with it, 
and the name of the printer appearing only at the end of the book, 
without date or place of address — "Imprinted at London by | Williain 
Brome." And here, by the vv^ay, it may be mentioned that though 
called in catalogues a quarto, its signatures are in eights. As 
before stated, both Thomas Ady and Anthony a Wood tell us that 
it " did for a time make great impressions on the Magistracy 
and Clergy", and that it did so generally is shown by the appear- 
ance of Webster's, Ady's, and other books on the same side, and 
those of Gifford, Perkins, and others, on the other, including King 
James, who, in 1597, issued his Dcemonologie specially against it. 
Whether Elizabeth or the authorities under her took any notice of it 
is doubtful, for, as I have said, he was still an Esquire in 1587 ; and 
the last words of his will, "for greate is the trouble my poor wief hath 
had with me, and small is the comforte she hath receyved at my 
hands", and his designation of himself as "gent.", point rather to a 
voluntary surrender of his office, through weakness and ill-health, 
than to a dismissal. 
But zeal for the truth, as he believed it, combined with his fears for 
himself, for he believed that he had been the object of witchcraft and 
of the machinations of the evil powers more than once, though 
luckily in vain, led the royal author on the other side to cause Scot's 
book to be burned by the common hangman ; and, as is also said by 
Cole, not one copy alone, as significant of its character, and of its

--- PAGE 48 ---
XXXVttl 
Introditction. 
being a liber prohibitiis in the eyes of this Protestant Pope, but as 
many as could be laid hands upon. While, too, I have as yet found 
no direct proof of this latter statement, it is perhaps in some degree 
confirmatory of it, that no copies of the book exist in the library of 
St. Paul's Cathedral, nor in that of Lambeth Palace, nor in that of 
Sion College. To the same cause is most likely due the exceedingly 
neat copy of various chapters, and parts of chapters, contained in the 
Sloane MS., fif. 2189, in the British Museum, its date according to 
the experts there being circa 1620. At one time I had suspected that 
these extracts had been made with the intent of writing a book either 
for or against the truth of witchcraft ; but the methodical neatness 
of all but the first two or three pages, the manner in which the typo- 
graphical form of the book is followed, the consecutive, though 
broken manner, in which the extracts follow one another, the absence 
of any word or any sign of remark or comment throughout, now cause 
me to hold that it was a copy made by or for one who took such por- 
tions as he wished from a book otherwise inaccessible. 
Turning back to this burning, I would say also that I have not 
come across any English contemporary, or even early statement as 
to it, much less as to its date. Perhaps, however, without much 
fear of error, we may suppose it to have been done immediately after 
the Act against witches, passed in the first year of James's reign. By it 
the Act 5 Eliz. was repealed, and any conjuration, etc., of an evil 
spirit was made a crime punishable by death as a felon, the culprit 
losing all benefit of clergy and sanctuary. The finding of treasure by 
magical means, provoking to unlawful love, or destroymg of cattle, 
was for the first offence to bring with it imprisonment for one year, 
standing in the pillory once a quarter for six hours, and confessing his 
crime, as in the Act repealed; and for the second offence death as a 
felon, though the dowry and the heirship were not attainted. This Act 
itself shows how strong were James's convictions in the matter, as 
does the publication in London of his Dcemonologie in the same year, 
it being entered on the Stationers' Registers on the 3rd April 1603. 
Scot^s book was therefore against James's belief, and the esteem in 
which it was held against his own powers as a reasoner and author. 
While, however, so far as I can find, we owe the knowledge of this 
burning to a German source, its extreme likelihood is corroborated by

--- PAGE 49 ---
Ivii'oditctwn. 
xxxix 
what I have said, that James's belief in witchcraft was with him an 
undoubted Article of Faith, and by the fact that various books, 
known and unknown, were at different times publicly burnt during 
his reign, though no official records of these burnings have been 
preserved. 
Cole, as quoted in Bliss's edition of the Allien. Oxon., gives the 
account as made by Thomasius de crimine magiae, a book which I 
believe does not exist. There is a Thesis inaugaralis de crimine 
magiae submitted in 1701 by Johan Reiche to the Regia Academia 
Fredericiana . . . praeside D. Christiano Thomasio. But Reiche 
refers to an earlier writer — " Gisberti Voetii | Theologise in Acad. 
Ultrajectina Professoris | Selectarum | Disputationum | Theologi- 
carum, | Pars Tertia. | . . . . | Ultrajecti, | Ex Officina Johannis a 
Waesberge, | Anno cio ID c Lix, | " which says, p. 564 : 
". . . . Reginaldus Scot nobilis Anglus magiae crimen aperte negavit, 
& ex professo oppugnavit, omnes ejus mirabiles effectus aut ad melan- 
coliam, aliosve naturales morbos, aut ad artem, industriam, & agili- 
tatem hominum figmentis & prsestigiis suis illudentium, aut ad stolidas 
imaginationes, dictorum magorum, aut ad vanas nugas & fictiones 
eorundem magorum referens. Ejus liber tit. Discoverie of Wilh- 
craft \sic\ in Anglia combustus est ; quem nominatim etiam per- 
stringit Sereniss. Magnae Briantniae [j/c] Rex Jacobus in DcBinonologia, 
eumque tangit dififusissimas eruditionis Theologus Johannes Raynoldus, 
in cens. lib. Apocryph. torn, zprcelect. 169. In eundem, sed innominatum 
calamum strinxit eximius & subacti judicii Theologus, Gidlelm. Per- 
kinsus in traclatu de Bascanologia. Pars libri istius Reginaldi Scot 
elenctica (nam reliqua in editione Anglicana conjurationes continebat,) 
in Belgicum idioma translata est, ante annos aliquot Lugd. Batav. 
per Thomam Basson : ex illius libri lectione, seu fonte perenni, non 
pauci ab illo tempore docti & indocti in Belgio fluctuare, & de Magia 
aK^wTiKvC^t.iv ac Xt^epTtvi^etv, (ut Libertinis & Semilibertinis infesta 
est patria nostra) quin eo ignorantiae saspe prolabi, ut non inique illis 
applicari potuerit, quod Sereniss. Rex Jacobus in Dcemonologid sub- 
dito suo Reginaldo Scot : esse quasi novos SadduccBOS : cum omnes 
diabolorum operationes & apparitiones suaviter exibilant: tanquam 
anicularum, aut superstitionis meticulosae phantasmata ac sabellas. 
Sunt & alii, sed pessimi magise patroni, qui ad Deum & divina charis-

--- PAGE 50 ---
xl 
Introduction. 
mata seu gratias gratis datas, aut ad angelos bonos, operationes 
magicas referunt." 
Dr. W. N. du Rieu, Librarian of the University of Leydeji, kindly 
informs me, that a translation into Dutch, " omitting some formulae 
of malediction and other matters which would more interest English, 
readers," was made and edited by Th. Basson, an English stationer 
living at Leyden in i2mo in 1609. It was undertaken at the instiga- 
tion of the professors of law and history, and its dedication, dated 
loth January 1609, was to the Curators of the University, and to the 
burgomasters of Leyden. A second and corrected edition, published 
by his son, G. Basson, was also printed at Leyden in 1637, though the 
dedication is dated 8th May 1637, Amsterdam. 
Though in various of the notes the passages have been spoken of, 
yet to call attention to the matter, and in the hope that others may be 
more successful, I would add that I have not discovered the principle 
on which he went, nor his authorities, for his Scripture readings. In 
his Latin quotations he generally quotes the Vulgate, twice or thrice 
Beza, or Beza varied, while at other times he goes by some other 
translation, or possibly makes it himself. So his long English 
quotation, p. 284,. is not taken from WyclifTe's, Tyndale's, Cranmer's, 
Coverdale's, Matthews', or from the Genevan, Bishops', or Rheims 
versions, though more like the Genevan, while, curiously enough, it 
precedes the one of 161 1 by one or two verbal coincidences. Hence, I 
believe that he varied the Genevan version according to his own views 
and taste, and am the more inclined to this in that the passage is not 
in Italics, the then type and mark of quotations, but in Romans. 
Notwithstanding, however, the decree that had gone forth, and, 
notwithstanding the strange Sadducean assertion, not argument, set 
forth by James, and followed by John Rainolds, D.D., in his work on 
the Apocrypha {torn, ii, 1032), and by Gisbert Voet, the book's inherent 
excellency, as reported by Ady, and as evidenced by the notices of it 
in the various books on either side that afterwards came forth, and in 
part, perhaps, through that decree itself, called for its reproduction ; 
and in 165 1 it was issued with a new title-page, though naturally it 
was again not entered on the Stationers' Registers. This time it was 
really — as evidenced by the signatures — a quarto. The text was one 
and the same with that printed off by Richard Cotes ; but there were

--- PAGE 51 ---
Introduction. 
xli 
three issues, and three slightly different title-pages. The first bears — 
LONDON I Printed by Richard Cotes. 165 1. The second has — 
Printed. by R. C. and are to be sold by Giles Calvert, dwelling at the 
I Black Spread-Eagle at the West-end of Pauls. 1651. And except 
for these final words, separated on both title-pages by a line from the 
rest, both are word for word, and even to the misprint " superstions" 
identical. The explanation, in all probability, if not certainty, being 
that my "first" one was the first issue, when the publisher thought it 
more prudent to withhold his name ; the other, a second issue of 
copies still called for, when, finding no ill results, he had become bolder. 
The third has below the line spoken of : Loidon \ Printed by E. [not 
R.] Cotes and are to be sold by Thomas Williams at the | Bible in 
Little Britaiji 1654. In this "Scots" is printed without the apos- 
trophe, "men", "women", and "children", as also "treatise", have 
capital initials ; on both occasions it has " Devils", not " Divels"; and 
the last line but one above the dividing line ends " De-" not "Divels", 
and "superstions" is rightly printed "superstitions". These variations 
in the title-page, and the exact conformity of the text as to the various 
peculiarities of the letters, words, and sizes of the punctuation, show 
that Williams had come into possession of Calvert's remainder, or of 
his set-up type, and had issued these sheets, prefixing a new title-page 
of his own, printed by E. Cotes. 
There is not the slightest evidence of a copy of the 1584 edition 
having been prepared for the press, beyond the new title-page, and 
on two occasions the translation of Latin, that Scot had not — as he 
had done in similar instances — translated. The Latin-named in- 
gredients on p. 184 are Englished, and I have thus been enabled to 
give them in my notings with the more probability that they are 
correct. The second instance is, as stated in my margin, on p. 416. 
Two or three press errors are corrected, one of them not a certain 
emendation, and all within the competency of an ordinary compositor 
or reader ; but no others, not even that of " increase" for " incense", 
p. 446, while fresh errors, indicative of a careless "reader", are 
made. 
What has been thus said as to the character of this second reprint, 
goes to prove that it was a publisher's venture based upon the demand 
for the book, and, therefore, for gain, and one which he carried out spite 
//

--- PAGE 52 ---
xlii 
Introduction. 
of its having been burnt, and placed among the " prohibited books". 
In like manner, and for the like purpose, and as before, without entry 
in the Stationers' Registers, there was brought out the third, and so- 
called folio edition of 1665, though the sheets are in sixes. All but 
the title-page, which, curiously enough, was again re-written, though 
still bearing, like the second, the words, "By Reginald Scot Esquire"; 
it is a careless reprint of that second, with all its errors, and new 
ones superadded. But as a novelty and inducement to buy, nine 
chapters, commencing the fifteenth book, and a second book of the 
" Discourse on Devils and Spirits", were added by an anonymous 
author. Who this anonymity was, I have uselessly spent some little 
time in inquiring, time that might have been better employed, even had 
I found him. But it goes to prove that these additions were merely 
made for novelty's sake, and its glamour and gain, in that the writer 
was a believer in, and not improbably, from his minute directions, as 
well as from his reticence, a practiser of witchcraft, or of what he 
thought to be witchcraft. He also, and I give this as one possible 
clue, was a strong believer in the perishable Astral spirit of a man, as 
well as of Astral spirits in general, and much of his "Discourse" is 
taken up with remarks on these. 
I inay here add, as showing the carelessness with which these 
second and third editions were edited, a note of the errata marked in 
the first and not corrected in them. 
75, 21. "We," so the second; in the third the (,) is rightly placed 
after "years". A correction that could have been made by the least 
intelligent of " readers". 
168, 31. "Earth read firmament.'' Not corrected. 
247,29. " Write it." Not corrected. 
269, 16. " If there be masses delete U." Retained, but the second 
attempts to correct by inserting "no" before "masses", and the third 
follows suit, though it is as nonsensical as before. 
463, 16. "Their business read that business." Not corrected. 
Beyond these, the limited edition now printed is the only other 
known to me. As stated in the preface, it is a reprint of the first 
edition, with some slight alterations in the lettering, but not in the 
spelling. Besides the few errata that have been found and recorded, 
the small heading on its left hand pages up to p. 24 is "Chap.—",

--- PAGE 53 ---
Introdiution. 
xliii 
like that on the right hand, instead of being " i or 2 Booke". So 
also in the earlier pages, the marginal references, though correct, are 
not printed line for line with the original. The pictorial initial 
letters of the first chapter of each book occupy in the original almost 
a third of the page. The first word of a chapter has only its first two 
letters — including its pictorial letter — in capitals, but the remainder, 
as well as the rest of the first line, is in larger type than the rest. The 
original bemg also in black letter was enabled to use both Romans 
and Italics as variants, whereas the reprint could only use Italics. 
The rule of the original is, however, in general very simple. " The 
— Chapter", the contents of the chapter and proper names are in 
Romans; "The — Booke" and quotations in Italics; the translations 
of quotations in Romans. Wherever there can be any doubt the type 
of the original is marked in the margin, as are occasional uses by the 
author of [ ] to distinguish them from the editor's use of the same. 
It may be added that "The — Chapter", and the contents of the 
chapter, have been transposed. The V like arrangement of the lines 
at the end of a chapter have not been followed, but been imitated 
according to the spirit in which they were employed ; for, after an 
investigation made for the purpose, it was found that they do not 
indicate a division of the text or matter, but were simply compositors' 
devices to fill up a page when that page either ended a book, or when 
its blank space did not allow of the commencement of a new chapter. 
Similarly, on one page, a (" . ■) was added to complete the page. And, 
in like manner, if there was still space at the end of a book, an en- 
graving was inserted. I would add that all the page references that 
I make are to the pages of the 1584 edition. 
I had collected for an appendix various grammatical peculiarities 
of the age; but they increased the number of pages, and therefore the 
price of the book, without, as seemed to me, sufficient cause, more 
especially as the reader can readily consult Dr. Abbot'j' Shakesperian 
Grammar, as well as notices in other books. One point, however, 
ought to be attended to. Though an educated and University man, 
accustomed to Latin and Greek, he, like all of his time, followed the 
then frequent habit of using singular verbs after plural nominatives 
not immediately proceding tfiem. A close examination of these, both 
in Scot and Greene, another literate and Utriusque Academic in

--- PAGE 54 ---
xhv 
Introduction. 
Artibus Magister ; and one notable one in Ben Jonson, who elsewhere, 
so far as I know, avoids this error ; as well as those in Shakespeare 
and others, have shown me that they cannot be explained as is sought 
in Dr. Abbot's Shakesperiaii Grammar, § 333, where the form of the 
verb is held to be a remnant of the northern early English third person 
plural in "s". The instances alone of the auxiliary verbs so used set this 
theory aside, and show that the custom was due to carelessness, habit, 
the remoteness or after position of the true nominatives, and to the 
nearness of another word, sometimes even to a transposed objective ; 
or of a " that" or " which" that had the look of a singular, or in the 
case of a double nominative, to both words being considered as im- 
plying one thought, as indeed they often did, being merely synonyms. 
Our Elizabethan ancestors would have said : " Pity and compassion 
moves me," because they held pity and compassion were one and 
the same ; and the habit of using Saxon and Latin, or other syn- 
onyms, led them to use the same construction when the meanings 
were but allied. This seems to me the more likely explanation : but 
the reader may prefer this — that our ancestors took the phrase to 
be elliptical, and that the verb really employed after both substantives 
was to be understood after the first and before the " and". 
Contemporary Notices of Scot. — Of strictly contemporary notices, I 
know of but two. In Nash's Four Letters Confuted, 1 593, he asks, 
ed. Grosart, ii, 252 : " How is the Supplication a diabolicall Discourse, 
otherwise than as it intreats of the diverse natures and properties of 
Divels and spirits ? in that far fetcht sense may the famous defensa- 
tive against supposed Prophecies, and the Discoverie of Witchcraft be 
called notorious Diabolicall discourses, as well as the Supplication, 
for they also intreate of the illusions and sundrie operations of spirits." 
The second is in Gabriel Harvey's Pierces Supererogation, 1593, ed. 
Grosart, ii, 291 : " Scottes discoovery of Witchcraft, dismasketh 
sundry egregious impostures, and in certaine principall Chapters, & 
speciall passages, hitteth the nayle on the head with a witnesse: how- 
soever I could have wished, [G. H. is nothing if he be not quasi- 
critical and emending] he had either dealt somewhat more curteously 
with Monsieur Bodine, or cofuted him somewhat more effectually." 
Of course, various of the after-writers on witchcraft, whichever 
side they took, either spoke of him explicitly, or alluded to him ;

