ntlie 
affirme.) Tie a wild bull to a figtree, and he will be presentlie tame ; 
or hang an old cocke thereupon, and he will immediatlie be tender ; 
as also the feathers of an eagle consume all other feathers, if they 
be intermedled together. Wherein it may not be denied, but nature 
sheweth hir selfe a proper workwoman. But it seemeth unpossible, 
that a little fish being but halfe a foot long, called Remora or Remi- 
Hgo, or/ of some Echeueis, staieth a mightie ship with all hir loade 2g2.

--- PAGE 336 ---
238 
>3- Booke. The discoverie 
and tackling, and being also under saile. And yet it is affirmed by 
Pcmtanati- SO manic and so grave authors, that I dare not denie it ; speciallie, 
'canL cap. 3" bicausc I sce as strange effects of nature otherwise : as the propertie 
f.iViWus of the loadstone, which is so beneficiall to the mariner; and of 
%sp. Peuccr Rheubarb, which onelie medleth with choler, and purgeth neither 
^c.'^'"^''''" flegme nor melancholie, & is as beneficiall to the physician, as the 
other to the mariner./ 
206. 
Of late ex- 
perience 
neere Co- 
ventrie, &c. 
Aristot. in 
lib. de hist, 
animalium. 
Plin. de la- 
nicii colore. 
293- 
The fift Chapter. 
The incredible operation of ivaters, both standing and runnitig; of 
wels, lakes, rivets, and of their woonderfuU effects. 
HE operation of waters, and their sundrie vertues are 
also incredible, I meane not of waters compounded and 
distilled : for it were endlesse to treate of their forces, 
speciallie concerning medicines. But we have heere 
even in England naturall springs, wels, and waters, both standing 
and running, of excellent vertues, even such as except we had seene, 
and had experiment of, we would not beleeve to be Itt rerum natura. 
And to let the physicall nature of them passe (for the which we 
cannot be so thankefull to God, as they are wholsome for our bodies) 
is it not miraculous, that wood is by the qualitie of divers waters 
heere in England transubstantiated into a stone .'' The which vertue 
is also found to be in a lake besides the citie Masaca in Cappadocia, 
there is a river called Scarmandrus, that maketh yellow sheepe. 
Yea, there be manie waters, as in Pontiis & Thessalia, and in the 
land of Assyrides, in a river of Thracia (as Aristotle saith) that if 
a white sheepe being with lambe drinke thereof, the lambe will be 
blacke. Strabo writeth of the river called Crantes, in the borders of 
Italic, running towards Tarentum, where mens haire is made white 
and yellow being washed therein. Plinie dooth write that of what 
colour the veines are under the rammes toong, of / the same colour 
or colours will the lambs be. There is a lake in a field called 
Cornetus, in the bottome whereof manifestlie appeareth to the eie, 
the carcases of snakes, ewts, and other serpents : whereas if you 
put in your hand, to pull them out, you shall find nothing there. 
There droppeth water out of a rocke in Arcadia, the which neither 
a silverne nor a brasen boll can conteine, but it leapeth out, and 
sprinkleth awaie ; and yet will it remaine without motion in the hoofe 
of a mule. Such conclusions (I warrant you) were not unknowne to 
fan?ies and fambres.

--- PAGE 337 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 6. 
The sixt Chapter. 
The verities and qtcalities of sicndrie p7-etious stones, of cousening 
Lapidaries, dr^c. 
[he excellent vertues and qualities of stones, found, con- 
ceived and tried by this art, is woonderfull. Howbeit 
many things most false and fabulous are added unto 
their true effects, wherewith I thought good in part to 
trie the readers patience and cunning withall. An Aggat (they saie) 
hath vertue against the biting of scorpions or serpents. It is written 
(but I will not stand to it) that it maketh a man eloquent, and pro- 
cureth the favour of princes ; yea that the fume thereof dooth turne 
awaie tempests. Alectorius is a stone about the bignesse of a beane, 
as cleere as/ the christall, taken out of a cocks bellie which hath 
beene gelt or made a capon foure yeares. If it be held in ones 
mouth, it asswageth thirst, it maketh the husband to love the wife, 
and the bearer invincible : for heereby Milo was said to overcome 
his enimies. A crawpocke delivereth from prison. Chelidonius is 
a stone taken out of a swallowe, which cureth melancholie : how- 
beit, some authors saie, it is the hearbe wherby the swallowes recover 
the sight of their yoong, even if their eies be picked out with an 
instrument. Geranites is taken out of a crane, and Draconites out 
of a dragon. But it is to be noted, that such stones must be taken 
out of the bellies of the serpents, beasts, or birds,/ (wherein they 
are) whiles they live : otherwise, they vanish awaie with the life, and 
so they reteine the vertues of those starres under which they are. 
Amethysus maketh a droonken man sober, and refresheth the wit. 
The* corrall preserveth such as beare it from fascination or bewitch- 
ing, and in this respect they are hanged about childrens necks. But 
from whence that superstition is derived, and who invented the lie, 
I knowe not : but I see how readie the people are to give credit 
thereunto, by the multitude of corrals that waie emploied. I find 
in good authors, that while it remaineth in the sea, it is an hearbe ; 
and when it is brought thence, into the aire, it hardeneth, and 
becommeth a stone. 
Heliotropius stancheth bloud, driveth awaie poisons, preserveth 
health : yea, and some write that it provoketh raine, and darkeneth 
the sunne, suffering not him that beareth it to be abused. Hyacinthus 
dooth all that the other docth, and also preserveth from lightening. 
Dinolhera hanged about the necke, collar, or yoke of any creature, 
tameth it presentlie. A Topase healeth the lunatike person of his 
207. 
Ludovicus 
Ccelius. Rho- 
de, lib. antiq. 
Icct. II. ca. 70. 
Barthol. An- 
glicus, lib. 16. 
^94- 
* Avicenna 
cano. 2. tract. 
2. caf. 124. 
Serapio agg. 
cap. 100. 
Dioscor. lib. 5. 
cap. !)■>,.

--- PAGE 338 ---
240 
13. Booke. 
The discoverie 
Plin. lib. 37. 
cap. 10. 
Albert, lib. 2. 
cap. 7. 
Solin. cap. 32, 
395- 
* Rabbi Mo- 
ses aphorism, 
partic. 22. 
Isidor. lib. 14. 
cap- 3. 
Savanorola. 
208. 
passion of lunacie. Aitites, if it be shaken, soundeth as if there 
were a little stone in the belhe thereof : it is good for the falling 
sicknesse, and to prevent untimelie birth. Amethysus aforesaid 
resisteth droonkenesse, so as the bearers shall be able to drinke 
freelie, and recover themselves soone being droonke as apes : the 
same maketh a man wise. Chalcedonius maketh the bearer luckie 
in lawe, quickeneth the power of the bodie, and is of force also 
against the illusions of the divell, and phantasticall cogitations 
arising of melancholie. Corneolus mitigateth the heate of the mind, 
and qualifieth malice, it stancheth bloudie flu.xes, speciallie of women 
that are troubled with their flowers. Heliotropius aforesaid darken- 
eth the sunne, raiseth shewers, stancheth bloud, procureth good 
fame, keepeth the bearer in health, and suftereth him not to be 
deceived. If this were true, one of them would be deerer than a 
thousand diamonds. 
Hyacinthus delivereth one from the danger of lightening, driveth 
awaie poison and pestilent infection, and hath manie other vertues. 
Iris helpeth a woman to speedie deliverance, and maketh raine- 
bowes to appeere. A Saphire preserveth the members, and 
maketh them livelie, and helpeth agues and gowts, and suffereth 
not the bearer to be afraid : it hath vertue against/ venome, and 
staieth bleeding at the nose being often put thereto. *A Smarag 
is good for the eiesight, and suffereth not carnall copulation, it 
maketh one rich and eloquent. A Topase increaseth riches, heal- 
eth the lunatike passion, and stancheth bloud. Mephis (as Aaron 
and Hermes, report out of Albertus Magnus) being broken into 
powder, and droonke with water, maketh insensibilitie of torture. 
Heereby you may understand, that as God hath bestowed upon these 
stones, and such other like bodies, most excellent and woonderfull 
virtues ; so according to the abundance of humane superstitions and 
follies, manie ascribe unto them either more vertues, or others than 
they have : other boast that they are able to adde new qualities unto 
them. And heerin consisteth a part of witchcraft and common 
cousenage used sometimes of the Lapidaries for gaines ; sometimes 
of others for cousening purposes. Some part of the vanitie heereof I 
will heere describe, bicause the place serveth well therefore. And it 
is not to be forgotten or omitted, that Pharos magicians were like 
enough to be cunning therein. 
Neverthelesse, I will first give you the opinion of one, who pro- 
fessed himselfe a verie skilfull and well experimented Lapidarie, as 
appeereth by a booke of his owne penning, published under this title 
of Dactylotheca, and (as I thinke) to be had among the bookesellers. 
And thus followeth his assertion :

--- PAGE 339 ---
of Witchcraft. 
ctep. 6. 241 
Evax rex Arabum fertur scripsisse Xeroni, 
{Qui post Augustum regnavit in orbe secundus) 
Quot species lapidis^ qua ftomina, quive colores, 
Quaqj sit his regio, vel quanta potentia cuiqj, 
Ocult as* et£nim lapidum cognoscere vires, 
Quorum causa latens effectus dat manifestos, 
Egregium quiddam volumus rarutTique videri. 
Scilicet hinc solers medicorum cur a juvaturJ^ 
Auxilio lapidum morbos expellere docta. 
Nec minus inde dari cunctarum commoda rerum 
Autores perhibent, quibus hcEC perspecta feruntur. 
Nec dubiujn cuiquam debet fcdsumque videri, 
Quin sua sit gemmis divinitits insita virtus :i 
GaUT^s in sua 
tag. 5, 6. 
[• OcuUas] 
[•J 
Evax an old Arabian king 
is named to have writ 
A treatise, and on Neros Grace 
to have bestowed it, 
( Who in the world did second reigne 
after Augustus time) 
Of pretious stones the sundrie sorts, 
their names, atui in what clime 
And countrie they were to be found, 
tJieir colours and their hue. 
Their privie power and secret force, 
tJte which with knowledge true 
To understand, their hidden cause 
most plaine effects declare : 
And this will we a noble thing 
have counted be and rare. 
The skilfull care of leeches leamd 
is aided in this case. 
And hereby holpen, and are taught 
with aid of stones to chase 
Awaie from tnen such sicknesses 
as have in them a place. 
No less precise commodities 
of althings else therebie 
Are minis tred and given to men, 
if authors doo not lie. 
To whome these things are said to bee 
most manifestlie knowne. 
2g6. 
Eng^Wud by 
Abraham. 
FUming. 
309. 
1 :s giT-.^^- 
rufK & 
icrum ;rc:i: 
tur, quia :c- 
culzi ai, rs- 
rissirr^que 
sub scnsum 
cadit. 
II

--- PAGE 340 ---
242 
13. Bo6ke. 
The discoverie 
Manie mo 
authors 
may be na- 
med of no 
lesse anti- 
quitie and 
learning. 
It shall no false or doubtfull case 
appcare to anie one, 
Bttt that by heavenlie influence 
each pretious pearle and stone, 
Hath m his s2ib stance fixed force 
and vertue largelie sowne. 
2gj. Whereby it is to be concluded, that stones have in them cer/teine 
proper vertues, which are given them of a speciall influence of the 
planets, and a due proportion of the elements, their substance being 
a verie fine and pure compound, consisting of well tempered matter 
wherein is no grosse mixture : as appeareth by plaine proofe of India 
and Aethopia, where the sunne being orient and meridionall, dooth 
more effectuallie shew his operation, procuring more pretious stones 
there to be ingendred, than in the countries that are Occident and 
septentrionall. Unto this opinion doo diverse ancients accord ; 
namelie, Alexander Peripateticus, Hermes, Evax, Bocchiis Zoroastes, 
Isaac Judceus, Zacharias Babylonicus, and manie more beside. 
Plin. lib. 37. 
cap. 10. 
Albert, mi- 
ner, li. 2. ca. I. 
Solin. cap. 11. 
Ditcrius in 
scriti.cap.de 210 
complexioni- 
bus <5^^ com- 
plexatis. 
The seventh Chapter. 
Whence the pretious stones receive their operations, how curious 
Magicians use them, and of their scales. 
URIOUS Magicians affirme, that these stones receive their 
vertues altogether of the planets and heavenlie bodies, 
and have not onelie the verie operation of the planets, 
but sometimes the verie images and impressions of the 
starres naturallie ingraffed in them, and otherwise ought alwaies to 
have graven upon them, the similitudes of such monsters, beasts, and 
other devises, as they imagine to be both internallie in operation, and 
externallie in view, expressed in the planets. As for example, upon 
the Achate are graven serpents or venomous beasts ; and some- 
times a man riding on a serpent : which they know to be Aesculapitis, 
which is the celestiall serpent, whereby are cured (they sale) poisons 
and stingings of serpents and scorpions. These grow in the river of 
Achates, where the/ greatest scorpions are ingendred, and their 
noisomnes is thereby qualified, and by the force of the scorpions the 
stones vertue is quickened and increased. Also, if they would induce 
love for the accomplishment of venerie, they inscribe and expresse in 
2g8. the stones, amiable embracings and love/lie countenances and ges- 
tures, words and kissings in apt figures. For the desires of the mind 
are consonant with the nature of the stones, which must also be set

--- PAGE 341 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 243 
in rings, and upon foiles of such metals as have afifinitie with those 
stones, thorough the operation of the planets whereunto they are 
addicted, whereby they may gather the greater force of their working. 
As for example. They make the images of SaUcrtie in lead, of Sol ^^ff"' 
in gold, of Luna in silver. Marrie there is no small regard to be had dod. media ' 
for the certeine and due times to be observed in the graving of them: "Lpcr^Mar- 
for so are they made with more life, and the influences and configura- bod. dactyl. 
tions of the planets are made thereby the more to abound in them. As 
if you will procure love, you must worke in apt, proper, and freendlie 
aspects, as in the houre of Vemcs, : to make debate, the direct 
contrarie order is to be taken. If you determine to make the image 
of Vemcs, you must expect to be under Aqiiariics or Capricornus : for 
Safuriie, Taiines, and Libra must be taken heed of. IMlanie other 
observations there be, as to avoid the infortunate seate and place 
of the planets, when you would bring a happie thing to passe, and 
speciallie that it be not doone in the end, declination, or heele (as 
they terme it) of the course thereof : for then the planet moorneth and 
is dull. 
Such signes as ascend in the dale, must be taken in the daie ; if 
in the night they increase, then must you go to worke by night, 
&c. For in Aries, Leo, and Sagittarie is a certeine triplicitie, wherein 
the sunne hath dominion by A'Saq, Jupiter by night, and in the twie- 
light the cold star of Satur7ie. But bicause there shall be no ex- 
cuse wanting for the faults espied herein, they sale that the vertues 
of all stones decaie through tract of time : so as such things are 
not now to be looked for in all respects as are written. Howbeit 
Jannes and Jambres were living in that time, and in no inconvenient 
place ; and therefore not unlike to have that helpe towards the 
abusing of Pharao. Cardane saith, that although men attribute no H. Card. hb. 
small force unto such scales ; as to the seale of the sunne, autho- '^'^ ^"■^'■'■l- '°- 
titles, honors, and favors of princes ; of Jupiter, riches and freends ; 
of Venus, pleasures ; of Mars, boldnes ; of Merairie, diligence ; of 
Saturne, patience and induring of labour ; of Luna, favour of 
people : I am not ignorant (saith he) that stones doo good, and yet 
I knowe the scales or figures doo/ none at all. And when Cardane sgg. 
had shewed fullie that art, and the follie thereof, and the maner of H. Card. lib. 
those terrible, prodigious, & deceitfull figures of the planets with il^cap^^o. 
their characters, &c. : he saith that those were deceitfull inventions 
devised by couseners, and had no vertue indeed nor truth in them. 
But bicause we spake somewhat even now of signets and scales, I 
will shew you what I read reported by Vincentius in stco specula, 
where making mention of the Jasper stone, whose nature and pro- 
pertie Marbodeics Gallus describeth in the verses following :/

--- PAGE 342 ---
244 i3.Booke. 
The discoverie 
41, 52. 
^h^sva^dact^^'^' Juspidis csse decem species sepiemqtie ferunfur, 
lotheca, pag. Hic iSr= jmiltorum cogtioscitur esse colorum, 
Et mtdtis nasci perhibetttr partibiis orbis, 
Optimus in viridi translucentique colore^ 
Et qui phis soleat virtutis habere probatur, 
Casti gestattis febrem fugat, arcet hydropem, 
Adpositi'isque juvat mulierem partttrientem, 
Et tuta7nentum portanti credittir esse. 
Nam consecratus gratimi facit atque potentem, 
Et, sicut perhibent, phantasmata Jioxia pellit, 
Cujus in argenio vis fortior esse putatur. 
Etiglishcd by 
Abraham 
Fleming. 
Memoran- 
dum the 
authors 
meaning 
is, that this 
stone be selJOO. 
in silver, & 
worne on 
the finger 
for a ring: 
as you shall 
see after- 
wards. 
Seven kittds and ten of Jasper stones 
reported are to be, 
Of manie colours this is knowne 
which noted is by me, 
And said in inanie places of 
the world for to be seene. 
Where it is bred; but yet the best 
is thorough shining greefie. 
And that which prooved is to have 
in it more virtue plaste : 
For being borne about of such 
as are of living chaste,] 
It drives aivaie their ague fits, 
the dropsie thirsting drie. 
And put tmto a wottian weake 
ill travell which dooth lie 
It helps, assists, and comforts hir 
in pangs when she dooth crie. 
Againe, it is beleevd to be 
A safegard franke and free. 
To such as laeare and beare the same j 
and if it hallowed bee 
It tnakes the parties gratious, 
and mightie too that have it. 
And noysome fansies (as they write 
that ment not to deprave it) 
It dooth displace out of the mind : 
the force thereof is stronger, 
In silver if the same be set, 
and tuill endure the longer.

--- PAGE 343 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. s. 245 
But (as I said) Vincentius making mention of the Jasper stone, Vincent, lib. 
touching which (by the waie of a parenthesis) I have inferred Marbo- 'oios'coViib. ■ 
deus his verses, he saith that some Jasper stones are found having in 5; ■^fA loo- 
them the hvehe image of a naturall man, with a sheeld at his necke Lapidario. 
and a speare in his/ hand, and under his feete a serpent : which stones 212. 
so marked and signed, he preferreth before all the rest, bicause they 
are antidotaries or remedies notablie resisting poison. Othersome also 
are found figured and marked with the forme of a man bearing on 
his necke a bundle of hearbs and flowres, with the estimation and 
value of them noted, that they have in them a facultie or power re- 
strictive, and will in an instant or moment of time stanch bloud. 
Such a kind of stone (as it is reported) Galen wore on his finger. 
Othersome are marked with a crosse, as the same author writeth, 
and these be right excellent against inundations or overflowings of 
waters. I could hold you long occupied in declarations like unto 
these, wherein I laie before you what other men have published and 
set foorth to the world, choosing rather to be an academicall dis- 
cour/ser, than an universall determiner : but I am desirous of brevitie. jo/. 
The eight Chapter. 
The sympathie and antipathie of naturall and elementarie bodies 
declared by diverse examples of beasts, birds, plants, Sr'c. 
F I should write of the strange effects of Sympathia and Agreement 
Antipathia, I should take great paines to make you menti^suf- 
woonder, and yet you would scarse beleeve me. And if I fc''a"<=«- 
should publish such conclusions as are common and 
knowne, you would not regard them. And yet Enipedocles thought 
all things were wrought hereby. It is almost incredible, that the 
grunting or rather the wheeking of a little pig, or the sight of a simple 
sheepe should terrifie a mightie elephant : and yet by that meanes the 
Romans did put to flight Pyrhus and all his hoast- A man would 
hardlie beleeve, that a cocks combe or his crowing should abash a 
puissant lion : but the experience herof hath satisfied the whole 
world. Who would thinke that a serpent should abandon the shadow 
of an ash, &c ? But it seemeth not strange, bicause it is common, 
that some man otherwise hardie and stout enough, should not dare 
to abide or endure the sight of a cat. Or that a draught of drinke 
should so overthrow a man, that never a part or member of his bodie 
should be able to performe his dutie and office ; and should also so

--- PAGE 344 ---
246 13. Booke. The discoverie 
Englished by 
Abraham 
Fleming. 
302. 
corrupt and alter his senses, understanding, memorie, and judgement, 
that he should in everie thing, saving in shape, beecome a verie beast. 
And herein the poets experiment of liquor is verified, in these words 
following : 
 simt qjii lion corpora tantum^ 
Veriim animas etiam valeant mutare liquores : 
Some waters have so powerfull ben, 
As could not onelie bodies change,] 
But even the verie minds of men. 
Their operation is so strange.] 
Readalitle 213. 
tract of E- 
rasmus in- 
tituled De 
amicitia, 
where e- 
nough is 
said tou- 
ching this 
point. 
Xanihus i?i 
hisl. prima. 
Juh. lib. 25. 
cap. 2. 
The freendlie societie betwixt a fox and a serpent is almost in- 
credible : how loving the lizzard is to a man, we male read, though we 
cannot see. Yet some affirme that our newt is not onlie like to the 
lizzard in shape, but also in condition. From the which affection to- 
wards a man, a spaniell doth not much differ, whereof I could cite 
incredible stories. The amitie betwixt a castrell and a pigeon is much 
noted among writers ; and speciallie how the castrell defendeth hir 
from hir enimie the sparowhawke : whereof they saie the doove 
is not ignorant. Besides, the woonderfull operation and vertue of 
hearbs, which to repeat were infinite : and therfore I will onlie referre 
you to Mattheolus his herball, or to DodoncEiis. There is among them 
such naturall accord and discord, as some prosper much the better 
for the others companie, and some wither awaie being planted neere 
unto the other. The lillie and the rose rejoise in ech others neigh- 
borhood. The flag and the fernebush abhorre each other so much, 
that the one can hardlie live besides the other. The cowcumber 
loveth water, and hateth oile to the death. And bicause you shall not 
saie that hearbs have no vertue, for that in this place I cite none, I 
am content to discover two or three small qualities and vertues, which 
are affirmed to be in hearbs : marie as simple as they \)&, Jannes and 
Jambres might have done much with them, if they had had them. If 
you pricke out a yoong swallowes eies, the old swallow restoreth againe 
their sight, with the application (they saie) of a little Celondine. Xan- 
thus the author of histories reporteth, that a yoong dragon being 
dead, was revived by hir dam, with an hearbe called 
Balim. And Juba saith, that a man in Arabia 
being dead was revived by the 
vertue of another 
hearbe./

