e 
Astral Hierarchy, in regard that they are so infesting and inveterate 
to Mortal men, that the Grand Intention of the Prince of darkness 
may be accomplished in their designs./ 
35. But of all the rest such as haunt Mines and mettle men, are the 
most pernicious, and frequent from the same Cause with the former. 
Subterranean 
Spirits. 
Spirits of the 
^Iountains, 
Caves, and 
Tombs. 
Spirits of hid- 
den Treasures. 
The nature of 
such Spirits. 
56.Spirits that in- 
fest Mines and 
Miners.

--- PAGE 616 ---
5 1 8 Book II. A Discoursc concerning 
The nature of such is very violent ; they do often slay whole Companies 
of Labourers, they do sometimes send inundations that destroy both the 
Mines, and Miners, they bring noxious and malignant vapours to stifle 
the laborious workmen ; briefly, their whole delight and faculty con- 
sists in tormenting, killing, and crushing men that seek such Treasures, 
that mankind may never partake thereof to relieve their Cares, and 
worldly necessities. 
An Example 36. Such was A>ta:ber(^ius a most virulent Animal that did utterly 
Sptri^''"'^"' confound the undertakings of those that laboured in the richest Silver 
mine in Germany, called Corona Rosacea. He would often shew him- 
self in the likeness of a he-goat with Golden horns, pushing down the 
workmen with great violence, sometimes like a Horse breathing flames, 
and pestilence at his Nostrils. At other times he represented a Monk 
in all his Pontijicalibiis, flouting at their Labour, and imitating their 
Actions with scorn and dedignation, till by his daily and continued 
molestation he gave them no further ability of perseverance. 
Conclusion. 37. Thus, I have hinted the various distinctions, and sub-distinc- 
tions of Astral Spirits proper or common, illustrating their natures 
according to the opinions of the Learned ; from thence I proceed to 
say what the Infernal Hierarchy is, and whereof it doth consist in this 
fifth Chapter following. 
Chap. V. 
WTiit this I . 
Chapter treats 
ot 
The place of 
hell or the ha- 
bitation of de- 
vils. 
Of the Infernal Spirits, or Devils, and damned Soids treating, 
■ what their Natures, Names, and Powers are, &c. 
L 
Eaving the Astral Kingdome, I will now proceed to describe 
the natures, and distinctions of Infernal Spirits or Devils, and 
damned Souls, who are to be considered according to their 
ranks, and orders, exactly correspondent to the Quires, and Hierarchies 
of the Angels, or Celestial beings, wherein I will insist upon their 
names, shapes, places, times, orders, powers, and capacities, proceed- 
ing gradually from a general narration, to a particular Anatomy of 
ever)' sort of Spirit in its proper place and order. 
2. As for the Locality or Circumscription of the Kingdome of dark- 
ness, it is farr otherwise to be considered then the vulgar account it, 
who esteem the hellish habitation, a distinct Chasma or Gulph in a

--- PAGE 617 ---
Devils and Spirits. 
Chap. V. 
certain place, above, under, or in the Center of the Earth, where in- 
numerable Devils, and wicked Souls inhabit, who are perpetually- 
scorched, and tormented with material flames of fire. This is the 
opinion which naturally all men are addicted and prone unto. But if 
we will rightly consider the Kingdomeof Heaven and Hell, in respect 
of one another, we must look upon the similitude of light and darkness 
in this outward world, who are not circumscribed, nor separate as to 
Locality from one another ; for when the sun arises, the darkness of 
the night disappeareth, not that it removes it self to some other place 
or Country, but the brightness of the light overpowereth it, and 
swallows it up, so that though it disappeareth, yet it is as really there 
as the light is. 
3. This is also to be considered in*the description of the Habitations 
of good, or evill beings, that they are really in one another, yet not 
comprehended of one another, neither indeed can they be, for the 
evil Spirits if they should remove ten thousand miles, yet are they in 
the same quality and source, never able tofinde out or discover where 
the Kingdome of Heaven is to be found, though it be really through, 
and through with the dark Kingdome, but in another quality which 
makes them strangers to one another. 
4. A similitude hereof we have in the faculties of the humane Li'"e, 
as to the indowments of the Soul considered in the just, and in the 
wicked ; for to be good, pure, and holy, is really present as a quality 
'\Xi potentia with the depraved/ soul, although at that instant the Soul 
be cloathed with Abominations, so that the eye which should behold 
God or Goodness is put out. Yet if the soul would but come out of 
it self, and enter into another source or principle, in the center it 
might come to see the Kingdome of Heaven within it self, according 
to the Scripture, and Moses, \The word is nigh thee, in thy heart, and 
in thy Month. 
5. True it is that the Devils and damned Souls cannot sometimes 
manifest themselvs in this Astral World, because the nature of some 
of them is more near unto the external quality then of others, so that 
although properly the very innermost and outermost darkness be 
their proximate abode, yet they do frequently flourish, live, move, and 
germinate in the Aery Region, being some of them finite and deter- 
minate Creatures. 
6. But according to their fiery nature, it is very difficult for them to 
appear in this outward world, because there is a whole principle or 
gulph betwixt them, to wit, they are shut up in another quality or 
existence, so that they can with greater difficulty finde out the being 
of this World, or come with their presence into the same, then we can 
remove into the Kingdome of Heaven, or Hell with our intellectual 
Illustrated by 
a similitude. 
[» texl iu] 
The differe- 
rence 
betwixt heaven 
and hell. 
57. 
[t Deut. 30, 19 ' 
How the Devils 
cm come into 
this World. 
The great diffi- 
culty of their 
appearance.

--- PAGE 618 ---
520 
Book II. 
A Discourse concerning 
The cause of 
few appearan- 
ces now. 
The Devils 
power in the 
time of the 
Law. 
His power un- 
der Christ in 
the flesh. 
Under Chri- 
stianitj'. 
man ; for if it were otherwise, and that the Divels had power to 
appear unto Mortals as they list, how many Towns, Cities, &^c. should 
be destroyed, and burnt to the ground, how many Infants should be 
kild by their malicious power ! yea few or none might then escape in 
Lives, or Possessions, and sound minds, whereas now all these enjoy- 
ments are free amongst mortals, which proves, that it is exceeding 
hard for evill Spirits to appear in the third principle of this world, as 
for a man to live under water, and fishes on the Land. Yet must we 
grant, that when the imaginations, and earnest desires of some 
particular Wizards, and envious Creatures have stirr'd up the center 
of Hell within themselvs, that then the Devil hath sometimes access 
to this world in their desires, and continues here to vex, and torment 
so long as the strength of that desire remains which was the first 
attractive Cause. 
7. For the very cause of the paucity of appearances in these dayes, 
is the fulness of time, and the brightness of Christianity, dispelling 
such mists, as the sun doth cause the clouds to vanish, not by any 
violence or compulsion, but from a natural cause ; even so the King- 
dome of Light as it grows over mans soul, in power and dominion, 
doth naturally close up the Center of darkness, and scatter the 
influences of the Devil so that his tricks lye in the dust, and his will at 
length becomes wholly passive as to man. 
8. In the time of the Law, when the wrath and jealousie of the 
Father, had the dominion in the Kingdom of Nature, all Infernal 
Spirits had more easie access unto mankind then now they have ; for 
before the Incarnation of Christ, the anger of God had more dominion 
over the soul of Man, and was more near in nature unto the same ; so 
that the Devils could with more facility spring up in the element of 
Wrath, to manifest themselves in this outward principle, because the 
very Basis and Foundation of Hell beneath, is built and composed of 
the Wrath of God, which is the channel to convey the Devil into this 
sublunary World. 
9. But when Christ began to be manifest unto the World, the 
multiplicity of Appearances, and possessed with Devils, began insen- 
sibly to decay and vanish. And if any should object. That betwixt 
the space of his Incarnation atid his Suffering, such accidents were 
rather 7nore frequent than in the times before: To this I answer. 
That the Devil knowing well that his time was but short ; and also 
knowing, that till the great Sacrifice was offered up, he had leave to 
range and rove abroad the Kingdom of this World ; therefore he 
imployed all his forces and endeavours to torment those miserable 
souls and captives to whom Christ came to Preach Deliverance. 
10. But after the Partition wall was broken down, and the vail of

--- PAGE 619 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. v. 
Moses, and of the anger of God from off the soul in the death of Christ, 
there was a sensible ahd visible decay of the Devils prancks amongst 
mortals, and that little remnant/ of Lunaticks and Possessed, which 
continued after Christ, did the Apostles relieve and set at liberty, 
through the influence and virtue of the promise of the Son of God (to 
wit) the Holy Ghost, or the Comforter, which could not come until he 
went away : And on the day of Pentecost, whilst they waited in 
humility for the fulfilling of his promise, the very effect of Christs 
birth and sufferings did first manifest it self, when the Holy Ghost 
sprung up amongst them, to the destruction of Sin and Satan. 
11. And so long as the purity of Christianity continued in the 
Primitive Church, there were very few that the Devil could personally 
or actually lay hold of in the Astral Man, for the space of two hun- 
dred years after the death of Christ, until that from Meekness and 
Abstinence, the Christians began to exalt themselves in Loftiness 
and Worldly Honours ; then the Devil began to exalt his head 
amongst the Lip-Christians, bewitching them into every Lust ; and 
captivating their inward and outward faculties at his pleasure. As 
all along in Popery is clearly seen. 
12. Yet notwithstanding, the coming of Christ hath prevented the 
Devils force in general. Such Nations as have never embraced the 
Christian Faith, are still deluded and bewitched by him ; because 
the center hath never been actually awakened in any of them, so 
that the Devils power prevails over them mightily, to seduce them to 
worship things visible, and not the true God : For where the most 
darkness is in Religion and Worship, or in natural understanding, 
there his power is most predominant ; As in Tartary, China, and 
the East-Indies ; also in Lapland, Finland, and the Northern 
Islands. 
13. In the West-Indies or America, his access is very facil and 
freequent to the Inhabitants, so that by custom and continuance they 
were at the first discovery thereof, become so much substitute and 
obsequious to his power, that though they knew him to be a power 
of Darkness, yet they adored him lest he should destroy them and 
their Children. And unto such a height were they come at the Land- 
ing of Cortes, Drake, and Vandernort, that they could familiarly 
convert themselves into Wolves, Bears, and other furious Beasts ; in 
which Metamorphosis their Enthusiasms and Divinations were 
suggested, and such were held in greatest esteem. 
14. Till upon the Invasion of the Spaniards, the greater evil drove 
out the less, and the cruel Murthers of that Antichristian tradition, 
did both depopulate the Islands and most of the Continent ; and 
also by accident, though not through any good intention, extirpate 
 X 
58. 
Under Aposta- 
cies. 
Under Idola- 
try. 
How power in 
new-discovered 
Lands. 
His power in 
America.

--- PAGE 620 ---
522 
Book 11. A Discouvse concerning 
The variety of 
Conjuralions 
according to 
the Countries. 
Why few are 59. 
able to raise 
Spirits. 
The Names of 
Devils in the 
time of the 
Law, 
the race of such as addicted themselves to this infamous sort of 
Divination. In which devastation, and bloody inquisition, their Idols 
were discovered with their Oracles and Inchantments, far different 
from the European Conjurers, and any of their Ceremonies. 
15. But that which is the most remarkable in the Infernal proceed- 
ings, is this, That there is not any Nation under the Sun, but the 
Devil hath introduced himself amongst them through their Cere- 
monies and Worship, though quite opposite to one another : For in 
the Kingdom of China, by the sacrifice of Blood and Panaak, he is 
Conjured and Exorcized through the repetitions of several Super- 
stitious Invocations to the Sun and Moon. In Tartary the Magicians 
go quite another way to work, with Offerings to the Ocean, to the 
Mountains, and the Rivers, fuming Incense, and divers sorts of 
Feathers ; by which means the Devils are compelled to appear. So 
that we see how this Proteus can dispose himself in the divers King- 
doms of this World ; being called by other names in Tartary, China, 
thcSaj/and West-Indies, &c. then amongst the European Conjurers. 
Likewise the Greeks and Romans could Invocate Spirits by Prayers 
unto the Moon, and divers Sacrifices of Milk, Honey, Vervine, and 
Blood. And those that are addicted to Conjurations in Christianity, 
have attained to a more lofty and ample manner of Incantation and 
Conjuring with Magical Garments, Fire, Candles, Circles, Astrologi- 
cal Observations, Invocations, and holy Names of God, according to 
the Kaballa of the Jews.j 
16. So that every distinct Nation hath conformed its Conjuration 
unto the Ceremonies of that Religion which it professeth : And it is 
to be observed, That from a natural cause every Nation hath its 
Conjurations and Names of Devils, from the Constellation under 
which the Countrey lyeth, and from the Air or Wind to which such 
particular Dominations do belong ; so that no effect would follow, if 
one Countrey should traditionally inure themselves to the Forms and 
Exorcisms that are used by another Nation. And therefore is it that 
so many attempts are offered in vain amongst professed Christians to 
raise Spirits, because they have little or nothing from their own 
Constellation, but make use of what they have borrowed from the 
Greeks and Romans, or the ancient Imbecillity of the Egyptians 
Priests ; I mean, their simple forms of Invocation. 
17. But because we are rather upon the discovery of the Infernal 
Kingdom, as it hath no dependence upon the doings of mortal Men ; 
therefore we will proceed to discover what the Antients have said 
concerning it : So the next which we fall upon after the descrip- 
tion of their Habitations, and the manner of their Appearances, is 
their Names and Appellations diversly considered. First, from the

--- PAGE 621 ---
Devils and Spirits. Chap. V. 
Creation of the World to the coming of Christ, they retained the 
Hebrew names, as ISelial, ISaal, ISaalfeiui), ILela^, Sltior, satatrlron, &c. 
according to the seculum under which they were Invocated ; assum- 
ing names according to the present occasion about which they were 
imployed. 
18. Under the Constellation of China, they are Invocated by the Their Names 
Names Bail, Sinoam, ia.antam, iSal, ISaltal, Sfirall, the six Governours '° 
or Presidents : Ctanrangian, the chief of the Devils : ^^o, l^agm, 
i^.alfetn, ileto, the Devils of the four Winds : iLean, itan, ilan, aial, the 
Devils of the four Elements. And according to the nature of their 
language or words which do all consist of no more then one syllable, 
so are the Devils named. Yea, as it is conjectured by many learned 
Magicians, this language of the Chinenses is more Magical and adap- 
ted to Conjurations, then all the Oriental Tongues, because of the 
consonancy and copiousness thereof, together with the numerous and 
various Characters used by them. 
19. In the East-Indies, and in Tartary, the Names are the same I" -^"i'^- 
with those of China, though the Ceremonies differ. In Persia, Arabia, Tartaria, 
Natolia, jEgypt, JLthiopia, the Names are the same with the Jewish ^^"{y' 
Rabbins. But the Greeks and Romans have different from the rest, T^est Indies. 
according to their Language and Superstitions. The Turks, Musco- 
vites, Russians, Lapponians, and Norwegians, make use of the 
Sclavonian tongue in all their Conjurations. The West-Indians 
have very strange and antick Names and Ceremonies of their own, 
nothing depending on the Traditions and Practices of the old World ; 
for, as is related before, the Devil is sufficiently capable of introduc- 
ing himself through the Religious Superstitions of any Nation whom- 
soever, according to the Constellations, although strangers to the 
Rites and Ceremonies of others. 
20. But though their Names be conformable to the Language and The nature 
Climate of that Nation where they are raised or called; yet have °f 
they divers Names, suppose twenty or thirty to one Devil, according 
to the several ministrations they have had from the Creation to this 
day, leaving a several name behinde them at each of their appear- 
ances upon the earth ; for, according to the testimony of the Devil 
himself, if credit may be given to Devils, they, as they are abstrac- 
tively considered in their own Kingdom, have no imposed Names of 
distinction, but are forced to assume them when they rise up in the 
external principle of this World : although in some measure it must 
be granted, that there be some principal Kings and Dukes in the 
Infernal Hierarchy, that have Names establish'd upon them which 
cannot be transferr'd or altered. 
21. As for the Names that are recorded in this precedent Discovery The names of

--- PAGE 622 ---
2 24 2°°'^ 
A Discowse concerning 
of [5/V] Devils in 
Scot. 
60. 
The names of 
Damned souls. 
Whence the 
names of De- 
vils are. 
The names of 
Devils in the 
Kingdom of 
Fiaciin. 
The Shapes of 
Devils. 
of Witchcraft by Reginald Scot Esq ; being a Catalogue of Devils 
in their Rancks/ and Hierarchies, they are supposed to be fictitious 
and totally imaginary, being taken out of Bodin or IVyeri^s, which 
they recorded from the mouth of Tradition, and obscure Manuscrips :* 
And indeed were there any certainty in this List of Devils, it were to 
be preferred as the most ample and exact delineation that is extant. 
But it is the rather to be suspected, because of the little coherence 
it hath with the former received Names of Devils eitheir in Eio-ope, 
Asia, Africa, or America. 
22. But if we would speak of Damned Souls and their Names or 
Appellations, they are farr otherwise to be considered then the Devils; 
for such as their imposed Names were here on earth, such is the 
Name they have in the Kingdom of Darkness, after a Magical manner, 
according to the language of nature in the first principle of Dark- 
ness ; as the Saints in heaven retain their Names in a Ccelestial 
manner : And also, as the Astral Spirit of a Man deceased, retains 
its antient Name according to the Astral source in the principle of 
the one only Element. 
23. For as the language of Nature is found in the second Principle, 
it is likewise manifest in the dark Worlds property, according to the 
first Principle of Wrath ; as also the monstrous shapes of Devils 
and Damned Souls is correspondent to the Magical postures of their 
Souls whilst they were alive ; of which I shall speak more largely 
when their Shapes are to be described. According unto which, as 
also according to the rest of their attributes, viz. their Rancks, Nwn- 
bers, Times, Powers, Places, &c. their Names are fitted and conformed 
according to the uniformity of name and thing in the principles of 
the eternal and external nature. 
24. And as all other Nations have their various Appellations for 
Devils and Damned Souls, like their natural tone or language; so we 
can mention one Kingdom more admirable then the rest, viz. the 
Kingdom of Fiacim at the Northern Pole, where all the Counsellors 
are Magicians ; and the Names which they use in Invocations, are 
Mathematically disposed in a wonderful harmony and efficacy, to the 
performance of Magical operations. So much of the Places and 
Names of Infernal Beings ; the next to be considered is their Shapes 
^nd Likenesses. 
25. The Shapes of Devils are answerable to the cause of their 
Fall, and the Dominions to which they belong. Those that belong 
to the Supreme Hierarchy, when they are called by Magicians, do at 
first appear in the form of fierce and terrible Lyons, vomiting fire, 
and roaring hideously about the Circle ; from thence they convert 
themselves into Serpents, Monkies, and other Animals, till the Magi-

--- PAGE 623 ---
Devils and Spirits. chap. v. 
525 
cian do repeat the form of Constriction or Confinement to a Trine or 
Triangle, as before is mentioned in the Fifteenth Book of the Dis- 
covery. 
26. After the Conjuration is repeated, they forsake these bestial 
shapes, and *indow the humane form at first like troops of Armed 
Men ; till at last by frequent repetitions of other Ceremonies, they 
appear as naked Men of gentle countenance and behaviour. Yet is 
the Magician to take care that they deceive him not by insinuations ; 
for their fraudulency is unspeakable in their appearance and dealings 
with Mankind ; because we may be assured they appear not willingly, 
but are by forceable Conjurations compelled : so that they will ever 
minde their own ends in medling with man ; that is, to deprave his 
minde, or subvert the Lives and Estates of others through his means 
and assistance. 
27. The rest of the Infernal Dominions have various appearances. 
The two next Orders affect to represent the beautiful colours of Birds, 
and Beasts, as Leopards, Tygers, Pecocks, Ss^c. But by Conjurations 
they may be likewise reduced to a Manlike form, wherein they will 
readily answer every demand within the compass of their capacity, 
answerable to the Order unto which they belong : Yet many of them 
appear in Monstrous forms, and can hardly be conjured to desert 
them. Though the Exorcist Charm them never so wisely,/ they will 
shew him a pair of Crocodiles jaws, or a Lyons paw, with other 
dreadful menaces, enough to terrifie any Novice from such Damnable 
Injunctions as the practice of Magick. 
28. But more especially, the opinion of the antients is, That accord- 
ing to the division of the clean and unclean Beasts in the Law given 
unto Moses, the Shapes of Devils are disposed in the Infernal 
Kingdom : So that the most perverse and potent amongst the Devils 
represent the most ugly and mischievous amongst the Beasts, accord- 
ing to this following division ; viz. such Devils as ^starot^, iLucifcr, 
ISarlron, ^lotonofe, who incline men and instigate them to pride and 
presumptuousness, have the shapes of Horses, Lyons, Tygars, Wolves 
Such as instigate to Lust and Covetousness have the forms of Hogs, 
Serpents, and other filthy reptiles or envious Beasts, as Dogs, Cats, 
Vultures, Snakes, &^c. Such as incline to Murther, have the shapes 
of every Bird and Beast of prey. Such as Answer Questions humane 
in Philosophy, or Religion, have more tolerable shapes, almost manly, 
but with crooked Noses, like Mermaids, or Satyres. And of all the 
rest it is to be observed, that as not one single Lust or Vice hath 
dominion without mixture in the evil Spirits, so they are not of a 
distinct shape lik one single Beast, but compounded into Monsters, 
with Serpents-tails, four eyes, many feet and horns, S^c. 
As they appear 
to Magicians 
in the liighest 
rank. 
[* = indue] 
In the lower 
orders. 
61. 
That the De- 
vils are answe- 
rable to the 
unclean Beasts.

