d to be in hearbs : marie as simple as they \)&, Jannes and 
Jambres might have done much with them, if they had had them. If 
you pricke out a yoong swallowes eies, the old swallow restoreth againe 
their sight, with the application (they saie) of a little Celondine. Xan- 
thus the author of histories reporteth, that a yoong dragon being 
dead, was revived by hir dam, with an hearbe called 
Balim. And Juba saith, that a man in Arabia 
being dead was revived by the 
vertue of another 
hearbe./

--- PAGE 345 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 9. 
The ninth Chapter. 
303- 
The former matter prooved by manie examples of the living and 
the dead. 
ND as we see in stones, herbs, &c : strange operation and 
I naturall love and dissention : so doo we read, that in the 
I bodie of a man, there be as strange properties and vertues 
I naturall. I have heard by credible report, and I have 
read many grave authors constantlie affirme, that the wound of a man 
murthered reneweth bleeding ; at the presence of a deere freend, or 
of a mortall enimie. Diverse also write, that if one passe by a mur- 
thered bodie (though unknowne) he shalbe striken with feare, and 
feele in him selfe some alteration by nature. Also that a woman, 
above the age of fiftie yeares, being bound hand and foote, hir clothes 
being upon hir, and laid downe softlie into the water, sinketh not in 
a long [time ; some saie, not at all. By which experiment they were 
woont to trie witches, as well as by Ferrum candens : which was, 
to hold hot iron in their hands, and by not burning to be 
tried. Howbeit, Plutarch saith, that Pyrhtis his great toe had 
in it such naturall or rather divine vertue, that no fier could 
burne it. 
And Albertus saith, and manie other also repeat the same storie, 
saieng,/ that there were two such children borne in Germanie, as if 
that one of them had beene carried by anie house, all the doores right 
against one of his sides would flie open : and that vertue which the 
one had in the left side, the other brother had in the right side. He 
saith further, that manie sawe it, and that it could be referred to 
nothing, but to the proprietie of their bodies. Pompanatius writeth 
that the kings of France doo cure the disease called now the kings 
evill, or queenes evill ; which hath beene alwaies thought, and to this 
daie is supposed to be a miraculous and a peculiar gift, & a speciall 
grace given to the kings and queenes of England. Which some referre 
to the proprietie of their persons, some to the peculiar gift of God, and 
some to the/ efficacie of words. But if the French king use it no 
woorsse than our Princesse doth, God will not be offended thereat : 
for hir maiestie onelie useth godhe and divine praier, with some almes, 
and referreth the cure to God and to the physician. Phctarch writeth 
that there be certeine men called Psilli, which with their mouthes 
heale the bitings of serpents. And f. Bap. Neap, saith, that an olive 
being planted by the hand of a virgine, prospereth ; which if a harlot 
doo, it withereth awaie. Also, if a serpent or viper lie in a hole, it 
This com- 
mon expe- 
rience can 
justifie. 
7. IVierus. 
Plutarch, in 
vita Pyrhi. 
A Ibert. lib.de 
mor. animal, 
cap. 3. 
214. 
Pompan. lib. 
dc incant. 
cap. 4. 
304- 
Plutar. in 
vita Catonis, 
J. Bap. Neap, 
in lib, de na- 
tur. magia. i.

--- PAGE 346 ---
248 13. Booke. The discoverie 
maie easilie be pulled out with the left hand, wheras with the right 
hand it cannot be remooved. Although this experiment, and such 
like, are like enough to be false ; yet are they not altogether so 
impious as the miracles said to be done by characters, charmes, &c. 
For manie s'trange properties remaine in sundrie partes of a living 
creature, which is not universallie dispersed, and indifferentlie spred 
through the whole bodie : as the eie smelleth not, the nose seeth not, 
the eare tasteth not, &c. 
The tenth Chapter, 
The venon 
or poison 0 
an harlot. 
305- 
215. 
Matth. 13. 
Marke. 6. 
Luke. 4- 
John. 4. 
Wonder- 
full natu- 
rall effects 
in bones 
The bewitching venoine cottteined in the bodie of an harlot, how hir 
eie, hir toong, hir beatdie and behavior bewitcheth sofne men : 
of bones and homes yeelding great vertue. 
HE vertue conteined within the bodie of an harlot, or 
rather the venome proceeding out of the same maie be 
beheld with great admiration. For hir eie infecteth, 
entiseth, and (if I maie so saie) bewitcheth them manie 
times, which thinke themselves well armed against such maner of 
people. Hir toong, hir gesture, hir behaviour, her beautie, and other 
allurements poison and intoxicate the mind : yea, hir companie in- 
duceth impudencie, corrupteth virginitie, confoundeth and consumeth 
the bodies, goods, and the verie soules of men. And finallie hir 
bodie destroieth and rotteth the verie flesh and bones of mans 
bodie. And this is common, that we woonder not at all thereat, naie 
we have not/ the course of the sunne, the moone, or the starres in so 
great admiration, as the globe, counterfeting their order : which is in 
respect but a bable made by an artificer. So as (I thinke) if Christ 
himselfe had continued long in the execution of miracles, and had left 
that power permanent and common in the church ; they would have 
growne into contempt, and not have beene esteemed, according/ to his 
owne saieng : A prophet is not regarded in his owne countrie. I 
might recite infinite properties, wherewith God hath indued the bodie 
of man, worthie of admiration, and fit for this place. As touching 
other living creatures, God hath likewise (for his glorie, and our be- 
hoofe) bestowed most excellent and miraculous gifts and vertues upon 
their bodies and members, and that in severall and woonderfull wise. 
We see that a bone taken out of a carps head, stancheth bloud, and 
so doth none other part besides of that fish. The bone also in a hares 
foot mitigateth the crampe, as none other bone nor part else of the

--- PAGE 347 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. II. 
hare doth. How pretious is the bone growing out of the forehead of °| 
a unicorne ; if the home, which we see, growe there, which is doubted : 
and of how small accompt are the residue of all his bones ? At the 
excellencie whereof, as also at the noble and innumerable vertues 
of herbs we muse not at all ; bicause it hath pleased God to make 
them common unto us. Which perchance might in some part assist 
Ja7ines and Jambres, towards the hardning of Pharaos heart. But of 
such secret and strange operations Albert De mineral, cap. i. 
II. 17. Also Marsilius Ficinus, cap. i. lib. 4. Cardan, de rerum 
varietate. J. Bap. Neap, de magia naturali. Peucer, Wier, Pompana- 
cius, Fernelius, and others. 
The eleventh Chapter, 
Two notorious woonders and yet not marvelled at. 
THOUGHT good here to insert two most miraculous 
matters, of the one I am Testis ocielatus, an eie witnesse ; 
of the other I am so crediblie and certeinelie informed, 
that I dare and doo beleeve it to be verie true. When 
Maister T. Randolph returned out of Russia, after his ambassage 
dispatched, a gentleman of his traine/ brought home a monument of jod 
great accompt, in nature and in propertie very wonderfull. And bicause 
I am loath to be long in the description of circumstances, I will first 
describe the thing it selfe : which was a peece of earth of a good 
quantitie, and most excellentlie proportioned in nature, having these 
qualities and vertues following. If one had taken a peece of perfect 
Steele, forked and sharpened at the end, and heated it red hot, offer- Strange 
. properties 
ing therewith to have touched it ; it would have fled with great cele- in a peece 
ritie : and on the other side, it would have pursued gold, either in of^^"'^- 
coine or bulloine, with as great violence and speed as it shunned the 
other. No bird in the aire durst approch neere it ; no beast of the 
field but feared it, and naturallie fled from the sight thereof. It would 
be here to daie, and to morrowe twentie miles off, and the next daie 
after in the verie place it was the first daie, and that without the helpe 
of anie other creature. 
Johannes Fernelius writeth of a strange stone latelie brought out of Strange 
India, which hath in it such a marvellous brightnes, puritie, and fn°a stone: 
shining, that therewith the aire round about is so lightned and Ae ijke 
°' ° . qualities m 
cleared, that one may see to read thereby in the darknes of night, other stons : 
It will not be conteined in a close roome, but requireth an open and ^'^^^t^l^'^^' 
K K

--- PAGE 348 ---
250 
i;. Booke. 
The discoverie 
196, 197. 
iq8, 199, 
300. 
210. 
307- 
* Being the 
7 booke of 
this disco- 
verie : S/e 
tag. 133, 134, 
■35. 136, 
■37, '38, 
160, &c, 
M'here dis- 
course is 
made of 0- 
racles, &c. 
Look here- 
after in this 
booke for 
free place. It would not willing/lie rest or staie here belowe on the 
earth, but alwaies laboureth to ascend up into the aire. If one presse 
it downe with his hand, it resisteth, and striketh verie sharpelie. It 
is beautifull to behold, without either spot or blemish, and yet verie 
unplesant to taste or feele. If anie part thereof be taken awaie, it is 
never a whit diminished, the forme thereof being inconstant, and at 
everie moment mutable. These two things last rehearsed are strange, 
and so long woondered at, as the mysterie and moralitie thereof 
remaineth undiscovered : but when I have disclosed the matter, and 
told you that by the lumpe of earth a man is ment, and some of his 
qualities described ; and that that which was conteined in the farre 
fetcht stone, was fier, or rather flame : the doubt is resolved, and 
the miracle ended. And yet (I confesse) there is in these two 
creatures conteined more miraculous matter, than in all the load- 
stones and diamonds in the world. And hereby is to be noted, 
that even a part of this art, which is called naturall or witching 
magicke, consisteth as well in the deceipt of words, as in the/ 
sleight of hand : wherein plaine lieng is avoided with a figurative 
speech, in the which, either the words themselves, or their interpreta- 
tion have a double or doubtfull meaning, according to that which hath 
beene said before in the title* Ob or Pytho : and shall be more at 
large hereafter in this treatise manifested. 
The twelfe Chapter. 
0/ illusiotis, confederacies, mid legierdemaine, and hoiv they may 
be well or ill used. 
ANIE writers have beene abused as well by untrue reports, 
as by illusion, and practises of confederacie and legier- 
demaine, &c : sometimes imputing unto words that which 
resteth in the nature of the thing ; and sometimes to the 
nature of the thing, that which proceedeth of fraud and deception of 
sight. But when these experiments growe to superstition or impietie, 
they are either to be forsaken as vaine, or denied as false. Howbeit, 
if these things be doone for mirth and recreation, and not to the hurt 
of our neighbour, nor to the abusing or prophaning of Gods name, in 
mine opinion they are neither impious nor altogether unlawfull : 
though herein or hereby a naturall thing be made to seeme super- 
naturall. Such are the miracles wrought by jugglers, consisting in 
fine and nimble conveiance, called legierdemaine : as when they seeme

--- PAGE 349 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chaj). 13. 
to cast awaie, or to deliver to another that which they reteiiie still in Jivers con- 
their owne hands ; or conveie otherwise : or seeme to eate a knife, or juggling 
some such other thing, when indeed they bestowe the same secretlie afi^rge^'be 
into their bosoms or laps. Another point of juggling is, when they ginning at 
• pag- 321. 
thrust a knife through the braines and head of a chicken or pullet, 
and seeme to cure the same with words : which would live and doo 
well, though never a v.'ord were spoken. Some of these toies 
also consist in arythmeticall devises, partlie in experiments of 
naturall magike, and partlie in private as also in publike con- 
federacie./ / 
The xiii. Chapter. 30S. 217 
Of private confederacies and of Brandons pigeon. 
RIVATE confederacie I meane, when one (by a speciall 
plot laid by himselfe, without anie compact made with 
others) persuadeth the beholders, that he will suddenlie 
and in their presence doo some miraculous feat, which 
he hath alredie accomplished privilie. As for example, he will shew 
you a card, or anie other like thing : and will sale further unto 
you ; Behold and see what a marke it hath, and then burneth it ; 
and nevertheles fetcheth another like card so marked out of some 
bodies pocket, or out of some corner where he himselfe before had 
placed it ; to the woonder and astonishment of simple beholders, 
which conceive not that kind of illusion, but expect miracles and 
strange works. 
What woondering and admiration was there at Brandon the Exaniple 
juggler, who painted on a wall the picture of a dove, and seeing a u^uVwoon- 
pigeon sitting on the top of a house, said to the king ; Lo now 
your Grace shall see what a juggler can doo, if he be his craftes 
maister ; and then pricked the picture with a knife so hard and so 
often, and with so effectuall words, as the pigeon fell downe from 
the top of the house starke dead. I need not write anie further circum- 
stance to shew how the matter was taken, what woondering was 
thereat, how he was prohibited to use that feat anie further, least 
he should emploie it in anie other kind of murther ; as though he, 
whose picture so ever he had pricked, must needs have died, and so 
the life of all men in the hands of a juggler : as is now supposed to 
be in the hands and willes of witches. This storie is, untill the dale 
of the writing hereof, in fresh remembrance, & of the most part 
beleeved as canonicall, as are all the fables of v/itches ; but when you

--- PAGE 350 ---
2^2 
1 3. Bonke. 
The discoverie 
This I have 
prooved 
upon crows 
and pies. 
This might 
be done by 
a ton fede- 
rate, who 
standing at 
some win- 
dow in a 
church 
steeple, or 
other fit 
place, and 
holding the 
pigeon by 
the leg in a 
string, after 
a signe gi- 
ven by his 
fellowe, 
pulleth 
downe the 
pigeon, and 
so the 
woonder is 
wrought. 
are taught the feate or sleight (the secrecie and sorcerie of the matter 
being bewraied, and discovered) you will thinke it a mockerie, and a 
simple illusion. To interpret unto you the revelation of this 
mysterie ; so it is, that the poore pigeon was before in the hands of 
3og. the juggler,/ into whome he had thrust a dramme of Niix vomica, or 
some other such poison, which to the nature of the bird was so ex- 
treame a venome, as after the receipt thereof it could not live above 
the space of halfe an houre, and being let lose after the medicine 
ministred, she alwaies resorted to the top of the next house : which 
she will the rather doo, if there be anie pigeons alreadie sitting there, 
and (as it is alreadie said) after a short space falleth downe, either 
Starke dead, or greathe astonnied. But in the meane time the juggler 
useth words of art, partlie to protract the time, and partlie to gaine 
credit and admiration of the beholders. If this or the like feate should 
be done by an old woman, everie bodie would crie out for fier and 
faggot to burne the witch./ 
218. The xiiii. Chapter. 
Of publike confederacie, and whereof it comisteth. 
UBLIKE confederacie is, when there is before hand a 
compact made betwixt diverse persons ; the one to be 
principall, the rest to be assistants in working of mira- 
cles, or rather in cousening and abusing the beholders. 
As when I tell you in the presence of a multitude what you have 
thought or doone, or shall doo or thinke, when you and I were 
thereupon agreed before. And if this be cunninglie and closelie 
handled, it will induce great admiration to the beholders ; 
speciallie when they are before amazed and abused 
by some experiments of naturall magike, arythmeticall 
conclusions, or legierdemaine. Such were, for the 
most part, the conclusions and devises of 
Feates : wherein doubt you not, but 
f amies and fambres were 
expert, active, and 
readie.

--- PAGE 351 ---
of Witchcraft. 
Chap. 15. 
The XV. Chapter. 
How tnen have beene abtised with words of equivocation, with sundrie 
exafttples thereof. 
|OME have taught, and others have viritten certeine ex- 
periments ; in the expressing whereof they have used 
such words of equivocation, as wherby manie have beene 
overtaken and abused through/ rash credulitie : so as 
sometimes (I saie) they have reported, taught, and written that which 
their capacitie tooke hold upon, contrarie to the truth and 
sincere meaning of the author. It is a common jest among the water 
men of the Thames, to shew the parish church of Stone to the passen- 
gers, calling the same by the name of the lanterne of Kent ; affirming, 
and that not untrulie, that the said church is as light (meaning in 
weight and not in brightnes) at midnight, as at noonedaie. Where- 
upon some credulous person is made beleeve, and will not sticke to 
affirme and sweare, that in the same church is such continuall light, 
that anie man may see to read there at all times of the night without 
a candle. 
An excellent philosopher, whome (for reverence unto his fame and 
learning) I will forbeare to name, was overtaken by his hostesse at 
Dover ; who merrilie told him, that if he could reteine and keepe in 
his mouth certeine pibbles (lieng at the shore side) he should not per- 
breake untill he came to Calice, how rough and tempestuous so ever 
the seas were. Which when he had tried, and being not forced by 
sicknes to vomit, nor to lose his stones, as by vomiting he must needs 
doo, he thought his hostesse had discovered unto him an excellent 
secret, nothing doubting of hir amphibologicall speech : and therefore 
thought it a worthie note to be recorded among miraculous and 
medicinable stones ; and inserted it accordinglie into his booke, 
among other experiments collected with great Industrie, learning, 
travell, and judgement. All these toies helpe a subtill cousener/ to 
gaine credit with the multitude. Yea, to further their estimation, 
manie will whisper prophesies of their owne invention into the eares of 
such as are not of quickest capacitie ; as to tell what weather, &c : shall 
followe. Which if it fall out true, then boast they and triumph, 
as though they had gotten some notable conquest ; if not, they 
denie the matter, forget it, excuse it, or shift it off ; as that 
they told another the contrarie in earnest, and spake that but in 
jest. All these helps might Pharaos jugglers have, to mainteine 
310. 
A jest a- 
raong wa- 
termen 
touching 
Stone 
church in 
Kent as 
light at 
midnight 
as at mid- 
daie. 
219- 
A slender 
shift to save 
the credit 
of their 
cunning.

--- PAGE 352 ---
2 54 i3 B..oke. The discovejde 
their cousenages and illusions, towards the ^hardening of Pharaos 
hart. 
Hereunto belong all maner of charmes, periapts, amulets, charac- 
ters, and such other superstitions, both popish and prophane : vvhere- 
j//. by (if that were true, which either papists, conjurors, or wit/ches 
undertake to doo) we might dailie see the verie miracles wrought 
indeed, which Pharaos magicians seemed to performe. Howbeit, 
bicause by all those devises or cousenages, there cannot be made so 
much as a nit, so as Jannes and Janibres could have no helpe that 
waie, I will speake thereof in place more convenient. 
The xvi. Chapter. 
The incon- 
venience 
of holding 
opinion, 
that what- 
soever pas- 
seth our ca- 
pacitie, is 
divine, su- 
pernatu- 
ral!, &c. 
312. 
How sotne are abused with natural! magike, and sundrie examples 
thereof when ilhcsion is added thereunto, of facobs pied sheepe, 
and of a blacke Moore. 
UT as these notable and wonderfull experiments and con- 
clusions that are found out in nature it selfe (through 
wisedome, learning, and Industrie) doo greatlie oppose 
and astonnish the capacitie of man ; so (I sale) when 
deceipt and illusion is annexed thereunto, then is the wit, the faith, & 
constancie of man searched and tried. For if we shall yeeld that to 
be divine, supernaturall, and miraculous, which we cannot compre- 
hend ; a witch, a papist, a conjuror, a cousener, and a juggler may 
make us beleeve they are gods : or else with more impietie we shall 
ascribe such power and omnipotencie unto them, or unto the divell, as 
onelie and properlie apperteineth to God. As for example. By con- 
federacie or cousenage (as before I have said) I may seeme to manifest 
the secret thoughts of the hart, which (as we learne in Gods booke) 
none knoweth or searcheth, but God himselfe alone. And therfore, 
whosoever beleeveth that I can doo as I may seeme to doo, maketh 
a god of me, and is an idolater. In which respect, whensoever we 
heare papist, witch, conjuror, or cousener, take upon him more than 
lieth in humane power to performe, we may know & boldlie sale it is 
a knacke of knaverie ; and no miracle at all. And further we may 
know, that when we understand it, it will not be woorth the knowing. 
And at the discoverie of these miraculous toies, we shall leave to 
wonder at them, and beginne to wonder at our selves, that could be so 
abused with/ babies. Howbeit, such things as God hath laid up 
secretlie in nature are to be weighed with great admiration, and to be

--- PAGE 353 ---
of Witchcraft. chap. 17. 255 
searched out with such Industrie, as may become a christian man : 
I meane, so as neither God, nor/ our neighbour be offended thereby, 220. 
which respect doubtlesse Jannes and Jambres never had. We find in 
the scriptures diverse naturall and secret experiments practised ; as 
namelie that of Jacob, for pied sheepe : which are confirmed by pro- 
phane authors, and not onelie verified in lambs and sheepe, but in 
horsses, pecocks, connies, &c. We read also of a woman that brought 
foorth a yoong blacke Moore, by meanes of an old blacke Moore who J;,/^%',^%' 
was in hir house at the time of her conception, whome she beheld in rai. mag. 
phantasie, as is supposed : howbeit, a gelous husband will not be 
satisfied with such phantasticall imaginations. For in truth a blacke 
Moore never faileth to beget blacke children, of what colour soever 
the other be : Et sic h contra. 
The xvii. Chapter. 
The opinion of uiifchmongers, that divels can create bodies, and of 
Pharaos magicians.. 
T is affirmed by fames Sprejtger and Henrie Institor, in 
M. Mai. who cite Albert hi lib.de animalib. for their M.Male/, p. 
purpose, that divels and witches also can truelie make '°' 
living creatures as well as God ; though not at an instant, 
yet verie suddenlie. Howbeit, all such as are rightlie informed in 
Gods word, shall manifestlie perceive and confesse the contrarie, as john. i, 3. 
hath beene by scriptures alreadie prooved, and may be confirmed by Coioss. i,i6. 
places infinite. And therefore I saie Jannes and fajnbres, though 
sathan and also Belzebiib had assisted them, could never have made 
the serpent or the frogs of nothing, nor yet have changed the waters 
with words. Neverthelesse, all the learned expositors of that place 
affirme, that they made a shew of creation, &c : exhibiting by cunning 
a resemblance of some of those miracles, which GOD wrought by the 
hand of Moses. Yea S. Augustine and manie other hold, that 
they made by art (and that trulie) the serpents, &c./ 
But that they may by art approch somewhat neerer 313- 
to those actions, than hath beene yet declared, 
shall and may appeere by these and 
manie other conclusions, 
if they be 
true.

