SOURCE: Ars Notoria — angelic art of knowledge acquisition through prayer and notation
CHUNK: 1/6  |  CHARS: 0-24477 of 140603
============================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
ARS
Notoria
The NOTORY Art of Solomon
T
ranslated from Latin into English
B
y Robert Turner, 1657


--- PAGE 2 ---
Ars Notoria: The Notary Art of Solomon
Translated by Robert Turner, 1656
Transcribed and converted to Acrobat by Benjamin Rowe, July 1999
Foreword copyright 1999 by Benjamin Rowe
Typeset in Adobe Caslon


--- PAGE 3 ---
i
Foreword
At the present time, there is only one English version of the Ars Notoria; all cur-
rently-available editions of the book are based on the translation done in the 1650’s by
Robert Turner, a student of magical and astrological texts. Turner translates a Latin
version published by Agrippa fifty years earlier. While  many earlier Latin versions
are referenced by scholars – some from as early as the 13th century – no one has as yet
taken the time to produce an updated English rendition of the work, or to fully com-
pare Agrippa’s version with the earlier versions. 
The foundation and essence of the practices described in the Ars Notoria lies in
the figures or “notes” that give it its title. These consist partly of realistic illustrations,
partly of sigils and signs similar to other grimoires of the day, and partly of text,
which winds into and around the graphical elements. When used as objects of
contemplation (or in a more active use of visual imagination) the notes are said to
place the user’s mind in a state in which it is granted complete knowledge or skill in
one of the seven Liberal Arts. Unfortunately, Turner’s translation did not include
these figures. 
Photographs of several notes can be found in Visual Art in Two Manuscripts of
the Ars Notoria, by Michael Camille, published in Conjuring Spirits: Texts and Tradi-
tions of Medieval Ritual Magic, edited by Claire Fanger, published by the Pennsylva-
nia State University Press. According to Dr. Fanger, there are at least three
stylistically distinct sets of notes to be found among the Latin manuscripts of the
Notoria. No one set is considered definitive.
The text instructs the practioner to “look into” or “inspect” the note with which
he is working several times a day, and to recite certain prayers and magickal names
during a portion of those occasions. The specific prayers and names are integrated
into the visual portion of the note in some instances, and it is not known whether
these integrated prayers are among the many translated by Turner. 
What is actually meant by “inspect” is obscure. The Latin word, inspicio, has
essentially the same range of meanings as the modern English word; none of them
are informative in the context. But the text mentions several times that visions are a
part of the process of use, without explaining exactly how they are involved; and the
section quoted below suggests that something more than close examination is
intended.
And know this; that if thou hast not the books in thy hands, or the faculty of
looking into them is not given to thee; the effe of this work will not be the
lesse therefore: but the Orations are twice then to be pronounced, where
they were to be but once: And as to the knowledge of a vision, and the other
virtues which these Holy Orations have; thou maist prove and try them,
when and how thou wilt.
So it would seem that a specific skill or ability is involved, a “faculty of inspec-
tion”. Perhaps this was simply the ability to memorize the image and visualize it


--- PAGE 4 ---
ii
while reciting the orations. The monk John of Morigny, who practiced the Ars Noto-
ria to some effect, later used such visualization in his own system of religious magic.
Such techniques were generally known at the time, from various systems for improv-
ing the memory. Or possibly the technique was similar to those used by modern
magicians to obtain a vision related to a specific symbol, by using it as a “gate” in the
imagination, and entering into an astral world that embodies the meaning of the
symbol. In any case, the author of the Notoria seems confident that one can get by
without such skill if necessary; the Prayers alone, said with sufficient fervor and rep-
etition, will produce the same results.
The book is divided into three sections. The first of these deals with what the
author calls “generals”; these are abilities of broad application – memory, eloquence,
understanding and perseverance – which need to be developed before the practitioner
works to obtain the particular skills of one of the Liberal Arts. These latter he refers
to as the “specials”. The section mixes commentary with prayers that are to be used to
obtain the abilities, in a manner that is somewhat difficult to follow. (It should be
noted that only an abbreviated form of some prayers is given. )
The second section deals with the “specials”, giving prayers in sequence for each
of the Liberal Arts, in the order in which they were customarily taught. The Notes
all relate to this section of the book; each prayer is accompanied by instructions on
the use of the proper note, and some small amount of commentary.
The third section presents some prayers that were allegedly given to Solomon at
a different time than those of the previous sections. However, most of these prayers
are those already referenced in Part I, save that they are given here in full. The focus
of this section is again on the “generals”, though the technique described varies in
some respect from those previously given. Dr. Fanger and others have speculated that
this section was a variant of Part I, which perhaps had originally been circulated sep-
arately, and later incorporated in the Ars Notoria for its greater detail.
None of these sections are clearly distinguished in the text, which can lead to a
great deal of confusion as instructions in one section seem to conflict with those in
another. The start of each section has therefore been marked by a footnote.
The text of this edition was transcribed directly from a photocopy of Turner’s
first edition, published in 1657. Even by the standards of the time, the book was not a
great example of the typographer’s art; it was cheaply printed, and was clearly typeset
by three different people, each with their own notions of what constituted good text
layout, and of what constituted proper spelling of English. For the overall layout of
this edition, I have selected elements from each of their styles, but use them consis-
tently throughout the text. The punctuation, and the spelling, capitalization and
emphasis of individual words have been left as in the original. The exception is that I
have not followed the 17th-century practice of substituting the letter “f” for “s”,
believing that doing so would greatly reduce the readability of the text. The errors
that have crept into recent printed editions (particularly the edition issued by the


--- PAGE 5 ---
iii
Holmes Publishing Group) are not present, although no doubt there are new errors
of my own devising. Several elided passages have been restored. 
Two additional articles present in the 1657 edition are not included here. The
first of these, A Certain Magnetick Experiment, describes a device for long-distance
communication based on an imaginary property of magnetized iron. The second, An
Astrological Catechisme, is a translation of a Latin document by Leovitius, partially
rewritten by Turner. It presents a series of questions and answers concerning astrol-
ogy and its practice.
Benjamin Rowe
June 30, 1999


--- PAGE 7 ---
Ars Notoria:
THE
N O T O R Y  A R T
OF
S O L O M O N
Shewing the
C A B A L I S T I C A L  K E Y
Magical Operations
The liberal Sciences
Divine Revelation, and
The Art of Memory.
Written originally in Latine, and now Englished by Robert Turner
London, Printed by F. Cottrel, and are to be sold by Martha Harison, at 
the Lamb at the East-end of Pauls, 1657
{
Of


--- PAGE 8 ---
2
The First Note of Grammar


--- PAGE 9 ---
3
               
The Epistle Dedicatory.
To his Ingenious and respeed friend Mr. William Ryves, of St. Saviours, South-
wark, Student in Physic and Astrology.
SIR.
he deep inspeion and dove-like piercing Eye of your apprehension into
the deepest Cabinets of Natures Arcana’s, allures me (if I had no other
attraive Magnetic engagements,) to set this Optic before your sight:
not that it will make any addition to your knowledge; but by the forti-
tude of your judgment, be walled against the art-condemning and virtue-despising
Calumniators. I know the candour of your Ingenuity will plead my excuse, and save
me from that labour; resting to be
Your real affeionate Friend,
Robert Turner.
Little Britain, die ,  in , 1656.
q


--- PAGE 10 ---
4
               
To the Ingenious Readers.
mongst the rest of the labours of my long Winter hours, be pleased to accept of
this as a flower of the Sun; which I have transplanted from the copious
Roman banks into the English soyle; where I hope it will fruitfully spread its
branches, and prove not a perishing gourd, but a continual green Laurel,
which Authors say is the plant of the good Angel, and defends all persons near its shade from
the Penetrating blasts of Thunder and Lightening, so will this be a flower fit for every
mans Garden; its virtues will soon be known, if Practised, and the blasts of vice dispersed:
its subject is too sublime to be expressed. Let not the carping Momi, nor envious black-jaw'd
Zoili rayl; let not the ignorant bark at that which they know not; here they learn no such
lesson: and against their Calumnies, the book I thus vindicate: quod potest per fidem
intelligi, & non aliter, & per fidem in eo operare potes. [illegible Greek quotation1],
&c., Heb. 11. &c., and my own intention I thus demonstrate; Dico coram omnipotenti
Deo, & coram Jesu Christo unigento Filio ejus, qui judicaturus est vivos & mortuous;
quod omnia & singula quae in hoc opere dixi, omnesque hujus Scientiae vel artis pro-
prietates, & universa quae ad ejus speculationem pertinent, vel in hoc Volumine con-
tinenter, veris & naturalibus principiis innituntur, fuintque cum Deo & bona
Conscientia, sine injuria Christiame fidei, cum integritate; sine superstitione vel
Idololatria quacunque, & non dedeceant virum sapientem Christianum bonum atque
fidelem; Nam & ego Christianus sum, baptizatus in nomine Patris, &c. quam fidem
cum Dei auxilio quam diu vixero firmiter inviolatam tenebo; Procul ergo absit a me,
discere aut scribere aliquid Christianae fidei & puritati contrarium, sanctis moribus
noxium, aut quomodolibet adversum. Deum timeo & in ejus cultum Juravi, a quo nec
vivus nec (ut confido) mortuus separabor: This small treatise I therefore commend to all
the lovers of art and learning, in which I hope they will attain their desires, quantum a
Deo concessi erit; so that I hope I have not cast a Pearl before the swine, but set a glass
before the grateful doves.
12 March 1656
Robert Turner
1. The original handwritten Greek: 
^


--- PAGE 11 ---
5
               
THE
N o t o r y  A r t
OF
S O L O M O N .
The Notory Art revealed by the Most High Creator to Solomon.
In the Name of the Holy and undivided Trinity, beginneth this most Holy Art of
Knowledge, revealed to Solomon, which the Most High Creator by his Holy Angels
ministered to Solomon upon the Alter of the Temple; that thereby in short time he
knew all Arts and Sciences, both Liberal and Mechanick, with all the Faculties and
Properties thereof: He has suddenly infused into him, and also was filled with all
wisdom, to utter the Sacred Mysteries of most Holy words.
Alpha and Omega! Oh Almighty God, the Beginning of all things, without
Beginning, and without End: Graciously this day hear my Prayers; neither do thou
render unto me according to my sins, nor after mine iniquities, O Lord my God, but
according to thy mercy, which is greater then all things visible and invisible. Have
mercy upon me, O Christ, the Wisdom of the Father, The Light of the Angels, The
Glory of the Saints, The Hope, Refuge, and Support of Sinners, The Creator of all
things, and Redeemer of all humane Frailties, who holdest the Heaven, Earth, and
Sea, and all the whole World, in the palm of thy Hand: I humbly implore and
beseech, that thou wilt mercifully with the Father, illustrate my Minde with the
beams of thy holy Spirit, that I may be able to come and attain to the perfeion of
this most holy Art; and that I may be able to gain the knowledge of every Science,
Art, and Wisdom; and of every Faculty of Memory, Intelligences, Understanding,
and Intelle, by the Vertue and Power of thy most holy Spirit, and in thy Name.
And thou, O God my God, who in the Beginning hast created the Heaven and the
Earth, and all things out of nothing; who reformest, and makest all things by thy
own Spirit; compleat, fulfil, restore, and implant a sound understanding in me, that I
may glorify thee and all thy Works, in all my Thoughts, Words, and Deeds. O God
the Father, confirm and grant this my Prayer, and increase my Understanding and
Memory, and strengthen the same, to know and receive the Science, Memory, Elo-
quence, and Perseverance in all manner of Learning, who livest and reignest, World
without end. Amen.


--- PAGE 12 ---
6
Here beginneth the first Treatise of this Art, which Master Apollonius calleth, The 
Golden Flowers, being the generall Introduction to all the Natural Sciences; and this is 
Confirmed, Composed, and Approved by the Authority of Solomon, Manichaeus, and 
Euduchaeus.
I, Apollonius, Master of Arts, duly called, to whom the Nature of Liberal Arts hath
been granted, am intended to treat of the Knowledge of Liberal Arts, and of the
Knowledge of Astronomy; and with what Experiments and Documents, a Compen-
dious and Competent Knowledge of Arts may be attained unto; and how the highest
and lowest Mysteries of Nature may be competently divided, and fitted and applied
to the Natures of Times; and what proper dayes and hours are to be eleed for the
Deeds and Aions of men, to be begun and ended; what Qualifications a man ought
to have, to attain the Efficacy of this Art; and how he ought to dispose of the aions
of his life, and to behold and study the Course of the Moon. In the first place there-
fore, we shall declare certain Precepts of the Spiritual Sciences; that all things which
we intend to speak of, may be attained to in order. Wonder not therefore, at what you
shall hear and see in this subsequent Treatise, and that you shall find an Example of
such inestimable Learning.
Some things which follow, which we will deliver to thee as Essayes of wonderful
Effes, and have extraed them out of the most Ancient Books of the Hebrews;
which, where thou seest them, (although they are forgotten, and worn out of any
humane Language) nevertheless esteem them as Miracles: For I do truly admire the
great Power and Efficacy of Words in the Works of Nature.
Of what Efficacy Words are.
There is so great Virtue, Power and Efficacy in certain Names and Words of God,
that when you read those very Words, it shall immediately increase and help your
Eloquence, so that you shall be made Eloquent of Speech by them, and at length
attain to the Effes of the powerful Sacred Names of God; but from whence the
power hereof doth proceed, shall be fully demonstrated to you in the following
Chapters of Prayers: And those which follow next to our hand, we shall lay it open.
An Explanation of the Notary Art.
This Art is divided into two parts: the first containeth general Rules, the second spe-
cial Rules. We come first to the special Rules, that is, First, to a threefold, and then
to a fourfold Division: And in the third place we come to speak of Theologie; which
Sciences thou shalt attain to, by the Operations of these Orations, if thou pronounce
them as it is written: therefore there are certain Notes of the Notary Art, which are
manifest to us; the Virtue whereof Humane Reason cannot apprehend. The first
Note hath his signification taken from the Hebrew; which though the expression
thereof be comprehended in a very few words; nevertheless, in the expression of the
Mystery, they do not lose their Vertue: That may be called their Vertue, which doth
happen and proceed from their pronunciation, which ought to be greatly admired at.


--- PAGE 13 ---
7
The first Precept.
Hely, Scemath Amazaz, Hemel, Sathusteon, hheli Tamazam, &cet. which Solomon enti-
tled, His First Revelation; and that to be without any Interpretation: It being a Sci-
ence of so Transcendent a purity, that it hath its Original out of the depth and
profundity of the Chaldee, Hebrew, and Grecian Languages; and therefore cannot
possible by any means be explicated fully in the poor Thread-bare Scheme of our
Language. And of what nature the Efficacy of the aforesaid words are, Solomon him-
self doth describe in his Eleventh Book, Helisoe, of the Mighty Glory of the Creator:
But the Friend and Successor of Solomon, that is, Apollonius, with some few others, to
whom that Science hath been manifested, have explained the same, and defined it to
be most Holy, Divine, Deep, and Profound Mysteries; and not to be disclosed nor
pronounced, without great Faith and reverence.
A Spiritual Mandate of the precedent Oration.
Before any one is to reade or pronounce any Orations of this Art, to bring them to
Effe, let them always first reverently and devoutly rehearse the Prayer in the begin-
ning. 
If any one will search the Scriptures, or would understand, or eloquently pro-
nounce any part of Scripture, let him pronounce the words of the following Figure,
to wit, Hely Scemath, in the morning betimes of that day, wherein thou wilt begin any
work. And in the Name of the Lord our God, let him diligently pronounce the
Scripture proposed, with this Prayer which follows, which is, Theos Megale; And is
mystically distorted, and miraculously and properly framed out of the Hebrew, Greek,
and Chaldee Tongues, and it extendeth itself briefly into every Language, in what
beginning soever they are declared. The second part of the Oration of the second
Chapter, is taken out of the Hebrew, Greek, and Chaldee; and the following Expos-
tion thereof ought to be pronounced first, which is a Latine Oration: The third Ora-
tion of the three Chapters, always in the beginning of every faculty, is first to be
rehearsed.
The Oration is, Theos Megthe, in tu yma Eurel, &cet..
This sheweth, how the foregoing Prayer is expounded: But although this is a
particular and brief Expostion of this Oration; yet do not think, that all words are
thus expounded.
The Exposition of this Oration.
Oh God, the Light of the World, Father of Immense Eternity, Giver of all Wisdom
and Knowledge, and of all Spiritual Grace: most Holy and Inestimable Dispenser,
knowing all things before they are made; who makest Light and Darkness: Stretch
forth thy Hand, and touch my Mouth, and make my tongue as a sharp sword, to
shew forth these words with eloquence; Make my Tongue as an Arrow eleed to
declare thy Wonders, and to pronounce them memorably: Send forth thy holy


--- PAGE 14 ---
8
Spirit, O Lord, into my Heart and Soul, to understand and retain them, and to
meditate on them in my Conscience: By the Oath of thy Heart, that is, By the
Right-hand of thy holy Knowledge, and mercifully inspire thy Grace into me; Teach
and instru me; Establish the coming in and going out of my Senses, and let thy
Precepts teach and corre me until the end; and let the Counsel of the most High
assist me, through thy infinite Wisdom and Mercy. Amen.
The words of these Orations cannot wholly be Expounded.
Neither think, that all words of the preceding Oration can be translated into the Lat-
ine Tongue: for some words of that Oration contain in themselves a greater Sense of
Mystical Profundity, of the Authority of Solomon; and having reference to his Writ-
ings, we acknowledge; That these Orations cannot be expounded nor understood, by
humane sense: For it is necessary, That all Orations, and distin particulars of
Astronomy, Astrology, and the Notory Art, be spoken and pronounced in their due
time and season; and the Operations of them to be made according to the disposition
of the Times.
Of the Triumphal Figures, how Sparingly they are to be pronounced,
and honestly and devoutly Spoken.
There are also certain Figures or Orations which Solomon in Chaldeack called, Hely;
that is, Triumphal Orations of the Liberal Arts, and sudden excellent Efficacies of
Vertues; and they are the Introduion to the Notory Art. Wherefore Solomon made a
special beginning of them, that they are to be pronounced at certain determinate
times of the Moon; and not to be undertaken, without consideration of the end.
Which also Magister Apollonius hath fully and perfely taught, saying, Whosoever
will pronounce these words, let him do it in a determinate appointed time, and set
aside all other occasions, and he shall profit in all Sciences in one Moneth, and attain
to them in an extraordinary wonderful manner.
The Expositions of the Lunations of the Notary Art.
These are the Expositions of the Lunation, and the Introduion of the Notory Art,
to wit, in the fourth and the eighth day of the Moon; and in the twelfth, sixteenth,
four and twentieth, eight and twentieth, and thirteenth they ought to be put in
operation. From whence Solomon saith, That to those times, we give the expositive
times of the Moon; of the fourth day of the Moon, which are written by the four
Angels; and in the fourth day of the Moon is manifested to us; and are four times
repeated and explained by the Angel, the Messenger of these Orations; and are also
revealed and delivered to us that require them from the Angel, four times of the
year, to shew the Eloquence and Fulness of the four Languages, Greek, Hebrew,
Chaldee and Latine; and God hath determined the Power of the Faculties of
Humane Understanding, to the four Parts of the Earth; and also the four Vertues of


--- PAGE 15 ---
9
Humanities, Understanding, Memory, Eloquence, and the Faculty of Ruling those
three. And these things are to be used as we have before spoken.
He sheweth how the precedent Oration is the Beginning and Foundation of the whole 
Art.
That is the first Figure of the Notory Art, which is manifestly sited upon a Quadran-
gle Note: And this is Angelical Wisdom, understood of few in Astronomy; but in the
Glass of Astrology, it is called, The Ring of Philosophy; and in the Notory Art it is
written, To be the Foundation of the whole Science. But it is to be rehearsed four
times a day, beginning in the morning once, about the third hour once, once in the
ninth hour, and once in the evening.
The precedent Oration ought to be spoken secretly; and let him that speaks it
be alone, and pronounce it with a low voyce, so that he scarcely hear himself. And
this is the condition hereof, that if necessity urge one to do any great works, he shall
say it twice in the morning, and about the ninth hour twice; and let him fast the first
day wherein he rehearseth it, and let him chastly and devoutly. And this is the Ora-
tion which he shall say:
This is the Oration of the four Tongues, Chaldee, Greek, Hebrew and Latine,
evidently expounded, which is called, The Splendor or Speculum of Wisdom. In all
holy Lunations, these Orations ought to be read, once in the morning, once about
the third hour, and once in the evening.
The Oration.
Assaylemath, Assay, Lemath, Azzabue.
The second part of the precedent Orations, which is to be said only once.
Azzaylemath, Lemath, Azacgessenio.
The third part of the precedent Oration, which is to be spoken together with the other.
Lemath, Sabanche, Ellithy, Aygezo.
This Oration hath no Exposition in the Latine.
This is a holy Prayer, without danger of any sin, which Solomon saith, is inexplicable
by humane sense. And he addeth, and saith, That the Explication thereof is more
prolixious, than can be considered of or apprehended by Man; excepting also those
secrets, which is not lawful, neither is it given to Man to utter: Therefore he leaveth
this Oration without Exposition, because no Man could attain to the perfeion
thereof: and it was left so spiritual, because the Angel that declared it to Solomon, laid
an inexcusable prohibition upon it, saying, See that thou do not presume to give to
any other, not to expound anything out of this Oration, neither thy self, nor anyone
by thee, nor anyone after thee: For it is a holy and Sacramental Mystery, that by
expressing the words thereof, God heareth thy Prayer, and increaseth thy Memory,


