SOURCE: Ars Notoria — angelic art of knowledge acquisition through prayer and notation
CHUNK: 2/6  |  CHARS: 23977-47448 of 140603
============================================================

s Oration without Exposition, because no Man could attain to the perfeion
thereof: and it was left so spiritual, because the Angel that declared it to Solomon, laid
an inexcusable prohibition upon it, saying, See that thou do not presume to give to
any other, not to expound anything out of this Oration, neither thy self, nor anyone
by thee, nor anyone after thee: For it is a holy and Sacramental Mystery, that by
expressing the words thereof, God heareth thy Prayer, and increaseth thy Memory,


--- PAGE 16 ---
10
Understanding, Eloquence, and establisheth them all in thee. Let it be read in
appointed times of the Lunation; as, in the fourth day of the Moon, the eighth and
twelfth, as it is written and commanded: say that Oration very diligently four times
in those dayes; verily believing, That thereby thy study shall suddenly be increased,
and made clear, without any ambiguity, beyond the apprehension of humane Reason.
Of the Efficacy of that Oration which is inexplicable to human sense.
This is that onely which Solomon calls The happiness of Wit: and M. Apollonius ter-
meth it, The Light of the Soul, and the Speculum of Wisdom: And, I suppose, the
said Oration may be called, The Image of Eternal Life; the Vertue and Efficacy
whereof is so great, that is understood or apprehended of by very few or none.
Therefore having essayed some Petitions, Signs and Precepts, we give them as
an entrance to those things thereof we intended to speak; of which they are part, that
we have spoken of before. Nevertheless, before we come to speak of them, some
things are necessary to be declared, whereby we may more clearly and plainly set
forth our intended History: For, as we have said before, there are certain Exceptions
of the Notory Art; some whereof are dark and obscure, and others plain and mani-
fest.
For the Notory Art hath a Book in Astronomy, whereof it is the Beginning and
Mistriss; and the Vertue thereof is such, that all Arts are taught and derived from her.
And we are further to know, that the Notory Art doth in a wonderful manner con-
tain and comprehend within it self, all Arts, and the Knowledge of all Learning, as
Solomon witnesseth: Therefore it is called, The Notary Art, because in certain brief
Notes, it teacheth and comprehendeth the Knowledge of all Arts: for so Solomon also
saith in his Treatise Lemegeton, that is, in his Treatise of Spiritual and Secret Experi-
ments.
Here he Sheweth, in what manner these Notes differ in Art, and the Reason thereof;
for a Note is a certain knowledge, by the Oration and Figure before set down.
But of the Orations and Figures, mention shall be made in their due place, and how
the Notes are called in the Notory Art. Now he maketh mention of that Oration,
which is called, The Queen of Tongues: for amongst these Orations, there is more
excellent than the rest, which King Solomon would therefore have be called, The
Queen of Tongues because it takes away, as it were, with a certain Secret covering the
Impediments of the Tongue, and giveth it a marvellous Faculty of Eloquence.
Wherefore before we proceed further, take a little Essay of that Oration: For this is
an Oration which in the Scriptures we are taught to have alwayes in our mouthes; but
it is taken out of the Chaldean Language: which, although it be short, is of a wonder-
ful Vertue; that when you reade that Scripture, with the Oration before-mentioned,
you cannot keep silent those things, which the Tongue and Understand suggest, and
administer to thee.


--- PAGE 17 ---
11
The Oration which follows, is a certain Invocation of the Angels of God, and it
provoketh Eloquence, and ought to be said in the beginning of the Scripture, and in
the beginning of the Moneth.
The Oration.
Lameth, Leynach, Semach, Belmay, (these Orations have not proper Lunations, as the
Commentator saith upon the Gloss.) Azzailement, Gesegon, Lothamasim, Ozetogoma-
glial, Zeziphier, Josanum, Solatac, Bozefama, Defarciamar, Zemait, Lemaio, Pheralon,
Anuc, Philosophi, Gregoon, Letos, Anum, Anum, Anum.
How the Oration is to be said in the beginning of every Moneth, chastly, and with a pure 
minde.
In the beginning of the Scriptures, are to be taught, how the precedent Oration
ought to be spoken most secretly, and nothing ought to be retained, which thy
Minde and Understanding suggests and prompts to thee in the reading thereof:
Then also follow certain words, which are Precepts thereof, which ought alwayes to
be begun in the beginning of the Moneth, and also in the dayes. I would also note
this, That it is to be pronounced wisely, and with the greatest reverence: and that
fasting, before you have taken either Meat or Drink.
Here followeth the Prayer we spake of before, to obtain a good Memory.
O Most Mighty God, Invisible God, Theos Patir Heminas; By thy Archangels, Elipha-
masay, Gelonucoa, Gebeche Banai, Gerabcai, Elomnit; and by thy glorious Angels,
whose names are so Consecrated, that they cannot be uttered by us; which are these,
Do., Hel., X., P., A., Li., O., F, &c. which cannot be comprehended by Humane Sense.
Here following is the Prologue of the precedent Oration, which provoketh and procureth 
Memory, and is continued with the precedent Note.
This Oration ought to be said next to the precedent Oration; to wit, Lameth: and
with this, I beseech thee today, O Theos, to be said always as one continued Oration.
If it be for the Memory, let it be said in the morning; if for any other effe, in the
evening. And thus let it be said in the hour of the evening, and in the morning: And
being thus pronounced, with the precedent Oration, it increaseth the Memory, and
helpeth the Imperfeions of the Tongue.
Here beginneth the Prologue of this Oration.
I Beseech thee, O my Lord, to Illuminate the Light of my Conscience with the
Splendor of thy Light: Illustrate and confirm my Understanding, with the sweet
odour of thy Spirit. Adorn my Soul, that hearing I may hear; and what I hear, I may
retain in my Memory. O Lord, reform my heart, restore my senses, and strengthen
them; qualifie my Memory with thy Gifts: Mercifully open the dulness of my Soul.
O most merciful God, temper the frame of my Tongue, by thy most glorious and


--- PAGE 18 ---
12
unspeakable Name: Thou who art the Fountain of all Goodness; the Original and
Spring of Piety, have patience with me, give a good Memory unto me, and bestow
upon me what I pray of thee in this holy Oration. O thou who dost not forthwith
Judge a sinner, but mercifully waitest, expeing his Repentance; I, (though unwor-
thy) beseech thee to take away the guilt of my sins, and wash away my wickedness
and offences, and grant me these my Petitions, by the vertue of thy holy Angels, thou
who art one God in Trinity. Amen.
Here he sheweth some other Vertue of the precedent Oration.
If thou doubt of any great Vision, what it may foreshew; or if thou wouldst see any
great Vision, of any danger present or to come; or if thou wouldst be certified of any
one that is absent, say this Oration three times in the evening with great reverence
and devotion, and thou shalt have and see that which thou desireth.
Here followeth an Oration of great Vertue, to attain the knowledge of the Physical Art, 
having also many other Vertues and Efficacy.
If you would have the perfe knowledge of any Disease, whether the same tend to
death or life: if the sick party lie languishing, stand before him and say this Oration
three times with great reverence.
The Oration of the Physical Art.
Ihesus fili Dominus Incompehensibilis; Ancor, Anacor, Anylos, Zohorna, Theodonos, hely
otes Phagor, Norizane, Corichito, Anosae, Helse Tonope, Phagora.
Another Part of the Same Oration.
Elleminator, Candones helosi, Tephagain, Tecendum, Thaones, Behelos, Belhoros, Hocho
Phagan. Corphandonos, Humanaenatus & vos Eloytus Phugora: Be present ye holy
Angels, advertise and teach me, whether such a one shall recover, or dye of this Infir-
mity.
This being done, then ask the sick person, Friend, how dost thou feel thyself?
And if he answer thee, I feel myself at good ease, I begin to mend, or the like; then
judge without doubt, the sick person shall recover: but if he answer, I am grievously
ill, or worse and worse; then doubtless conclude, He will dye on the morrow: But if
he answer, I know not how my Fate and condition is, whether better or worse; then
you may know likewise, That he will either dye, or his disease will change and alter
for the worse. If it be a Child, that is not of years capable to make an answer; or that
the sick languish so grievously, that he knoweth not how, or will not answer, say this
Oration three times; and what you find first revealed in your mind, that judge to
come to pass of him.
Furthermore, if anyone dissemble, and seek to hide or cover his infirmity; say
the same Oration, and the Angelical Vertue shall suggest the truth to thee. If the dis-


--- PAGE 19 ---
13
eased person be farre off; when you hear his Name, say likewise this Oration for him,
and your minde shall reveal to you, whether he shall live or dye.
If you touch the Pulse of any Woman with Child, saying the same Oration it
shall be revealed, whether she shall bring forth a Male or Female.
But know, that this miracle preceeds not from your own Nature, but from the
Nature and Vertues of the holy Angels; it being a part of their Office, wonderfully to
reveal these things to you. If you doubt of the Virginity of anyone, say this Oration in
your mind, and it shall be revealed to you whether she be a Virgin or Corrupt.
Here follows an efficacious Preface of an Oration, shewing what Vertue and Efficacy you 
may thereby prove every day.
Of this Oration Solomon saith, That by it a new knowledge of Physick is to be
revealed from God: Upon which, he hath laid this command, and calleth it, The
Miraculous and Efficacious Foundation of the Physical Science; and that it con-
taineth in it the quantity and quality of the whole Physical Art and Science: wherein
there is contained, rather a miraculous and specious, then fearful or terrible Miracle,
which as often-soever as thou readest the same, regard not the paucity of words, but
praise the Vertue of so great a Mystery: For, Solomon himself speaking of the subtilty
of the Notory Art, wonderfully extolls the Divine Help; to wit, Because we have pro-
posed a great thing, that is to say, so many and so great Mysteries of Nature, con-
tained under so specious brevity, that I suppose them to be as a general Problem to be
proposed in the ordination of so subtle and excellent a work; that the mind of the
Reader or Hearer may be the more confirmed and fixed here-upon.
Here he sheweth how every Note of every Art ought to exercise his own office; and that the 
Notes of one Art profit not to the knowledge of another Art, and we are to know, that all 
Figures have their proper Orations.
We come now, according to our strength, to divide the families of the Notory Art,
and leaving that part which is natural, we come to the greater parts of the Art: for
Solomon, a great composer, and the greatest Master of the Notory Art, comprehen-
deth divers Arts under the Notion thereof. Therefore he calleth this a Notory Art,
because it should be the Art of Arts, and Science of Sciences; which comprehendeth
in itself all Arts and Sciences, Liberal and Mechanick: And those things which in
other Arts are full of long and tedious locutions, filling up great prolixious Volumes
of Books, wearying out the Student, through the length of time to attain them: In
this Art are comprehended very briefly in a few words or writings, so that it discov-
ereth those things which are hard and difficult making the ingenious learned in a
very short time, by the wonderful and unheard-of Vertue of the words. 
Therefore we, to whom such a faculty of the knowledge of the Scripture of Sci-
ences is granted, have wholly received this great gift, and inestimable benefit, from
the overflowing grace of the most high Creator. And whereas all Arts have their sev-
eral Notes properly disposed to them, and signified by their Figures; and the Note of
every Art, hath not any office of transcending to another Art; neither do the Notes of


--- PAGE 20 ---
14
one Art profit or assist to the knowledge of another Art: Therefore this may seem a
little difficult, as this small Treatise, which may be called a Preludium to the Body of
the Art: we will explain the Notes severally; and that which is more necessary, we
shall by Divine Providence diligently search out the several Sciences of the Scripture.
A certain Special Precept.
This is necessary for us, and necessarily we suppose will be profitable to posterity,
that we know how to comprehend the great prolixious Volumes of writings, in brief
and compendious Treatises; which, that it may easily be done, we are diligently to
enquire out the way of attaining to it, out of the three most ancient Books which
were composed by Solomon; the first and chiefest thing to be understood therein, is,
That the Oration before the second Chapter, it to be used long before every speech,
the beginning whereof is Assay: and the words of the Oration are to be said in a com-
petent space of time; but the subsequent part of the Oration is then chiefly to be said,
when you desire the knowledge of the Volumes of writings, and looking into the
Notes thereof. The same Oration is also to be said, when you would clearly and
plainly understand and expound any Science or great Mystery, that is on a sudden
proposed to you, which you never heard of before: say also the same Oration at such
time, when any thing of great consequence is importuned of you, which at present
you have not the faculty of expounding. This is a wonderful Oration, whereof we
have spoken; the first part whereof is expounded in the Volume of the Magnitude of
the quality of Art.
The Oration.
Lamed, Rogum, Ragia, Ragium, Ragiomal, Agaled, Eradioch, Anchovionos, Lochen,
Saza, Ya, Manichel, Mamacuo, Lephoa, Bozaco, Cogemal, Saluyel, Tesunanu, Azaroch,
Beyestar, Amak.
To the operation of the Magnitude of Art; this Oration containeth in the sec-
ond place, a general Treatise of the first Note of all Scripture, part of the Exposition
whereof, we have fully explained in the Magnitude of the quality of the same Art.
But the Reader hath hardly heard of the admirable Mystery of the Sacramental
Intelle of the same: Let him know this for a certain, and doubt not of the Greek
words of the Oration aforesaid, but that the beginning of them is expounded in Lat-
ine.
The beginning of the Oration.
Oh Eternal and Unreprehensible Memory! Oh Uncontradiible Wisdom! Oh
Unchangeable Power! Let thy right-hand encompass my heart, and the holy Angels
of thy Eternal Counsel; complete and fill up my Conscience with thy Memory, and
the odor of thy Ointments; and let the sweetness of thy Grace strengthen and fortifie
my Understanding, through the pure splendor and brightness of thy holy Spirit; by
vertue whereof, the holy Angels alwayes behold and admire the brightness of thy


--- PAGE 21 ---
15
face, and all thy holy and heavenly Vertues; Wisdom, wherewith thou hast made all
things; Understanding, by which thou hast reformed all things; Perseverance unto
blessedness, whereby thou hast restored and confirmed the Angels; Love, whereby
thou hast restored lost Mankind, and raised him after his Fall to Heaven; Learning,
whereby thou wer't pleased to teach Adam the knowledge of every Science: Inform,
repleat, instru, restore, corre, and refine me, that I may be made new in the
understanding thy Precepts, and in receiving the Sciences which are profitable for my
Soul and Body, and for all faithful believers in thy Name which is blessed forever,
world without end.
Here is also a particular Exposition of the fore-going Oration, which he hath left 
unexpounded to be read by everyone that is learned in this Art, and know, that no humane 
power nor faculty in man is sufficient to finde out the Exposition thereof.
This Oration is also called by Solomon, The Gemme and Crown of the Lord: for he
saith, It helpeth against danger of Fire, or of wild Beasts of the Earth, being said
with a believing faith: for it is affirmed to have been reported from one of the four
Angels, to whom was given power to hurt the Earth, the Sea, and the Trees. There is
an example of this Oration in the Book called, The Flower of Heavenly Learning: for
herein Solomon glorifieth God, because by this he inspired into him the knowledge of
Theologie, and dignified him with the Divine Mysteries of his Omnipotent Power
and Greatness: which Solomon beholding in his night-sacrifice, bestowed upon him
by the Lord his God, he conveniently gathered the greater Mysteries together in this
Notory Art, which were holy, and worthy, and reverend Mysteries. These things and
Mysteries of Theologie the erring Gentiles have not all lost, which Solomon calleth,
The Signe of the holy Mystery of God revealed by his Angel before; and that which
is contained in them, is the fullness of our dignity and humane Salvation.
The first of these Orations which we call Spiritual, the virtue where of teacheth Divinity, 
and preserveth the memory thereof.
These are Orations also, which are of great vertue and efficacy to our Salvation: The
first whereof is Spiritual, and teacheth Divinity; and also Perseverance in the Mem-
ory thereof: Therefore Solomon commandeth it to be called, The Signe of the Grace
of God; for, as Ecclesiastes saith, This is the Spiritual Grace of God, that hath given me
knowledge to treat of all Plants, from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the Hyssop that groweth on
the wall.
The Election of time, in what Lunation these Orations ought to be said.
The first Oration ought to be said once in the first Lunation; in the third, three
times; in the sixth, six times; in the ninth, nine times; in the twelfth, twelve times; in
the seventeenth, seventeen times; and in the eighteenth, as many times; in the twenty
sixth, as many; in the twenty ninth, as many; and so many in the thirty ninth: for this
Oration is of so great vertue and efficacy, that in the very day thou shalt say the same,


--- PAGE 22 ---
16
as if it were determined by the Father, it shall increase thy knowledge in the Science
of Divinity.
But if otherwise that thou art ignorant, and it hath been seen by thy Compan-
ions, thy Superiors or Inferiors, though unto others thou shalt seem to have knowl-
edge; enter into the study of Divinity, and hear the Leures by the space of some
months, casting off all doubt from thee, of them who shall see thee, to know such
things: and in that day wherein thou wouldst say it, live chastly, and say it in the
morning.
Solomon testifieth, That an Angel delivered the following Oration in Thunder,
who standeth always in the Presence of the Lord, to whom he is not dreadful. The
Mystery hereof is holy, and of great efficacy: neither ought this Oration to be said
above once, because it moveth the heavenly Spirits to perform any great work.
Of this Oration he saith, That so great is the Mystery thereof, that it moveth
the Coelestial Spirits to perform any work which the Divine Power permitteth. It
also giveth the vertue of its Mystery, that it exalteth the tongue and body of him that
speaketh it, with so great inspiration, as is some new and great Mystery were sud-
denly revealed to his understanding.
Here followeth the beginning of this Oration, wherein is so great Virtue and efficacy, as we 
have said, it being said with great devotion.
Achacham, Yhel, Chelychem, Agzyraztor, Yegor, &c.
This is the beginning of the Oration, the parts whereof are four: But there is
something to be said of the beginning by itself, and the four parts severally; and then
between the beginning and these Orations, which are four, we shall make this com-
petent division.
For this is that which is to be spoken of the beginning severally: And this Ora-
tion is to be divided into four parts; and the first part thereof is to be said, that is, the
beginning, before any other part of the Oration is to be completed. These Greek
Names following are to be pronounced. This is the division of these Orations,
Heilma, Helma, Hmena, &c. Oh God the Father, God the Son, God the Holy Spirit,
Confirm this Oration, and my Understanding and Memory, to receive, understand,
and retain the knowledge of all good Scriptures; and give me perseverance of minde
therein.
This is the beginning of that Oration, which, as we have said before, ought to
be said according to the Prolations and Constitutions thereof; and ought to be
repeated, because of the forgetfulness of our Memory, and according to the exercise
of our wit, and according to the sanity of our life; there being contained in it so
great a Mystery, and such efficacious Vertue.
There followeth another subtle Oration, wherein is contained a Sacramental
Mystery, and wherein every perfe Science is wonderfully compleated: For hereby
God would have us to know, what things are Celestial, and what are Terrene; and
what heavenly things the Celestial effeeth, and what earthly things the Terrene:


--- PAGE 23 ---
17
because the Lord hath said, My eyes have seen the imperfe, and in thy book every
day shall be formed and written, and no Man in them, &c. So it is in the Precepts of
God: for we are not able to write all things, how the Sun hath the same course as at
first, that our order may be confirmed; for all writings whatsover, which is not from
God, is not to be read; for God himself would have all things to be divided: and this
is how these are to be used, before the second part, which containeth so glorious and
excellent Consecrations of Orations, and defineth the Consecrated part to have no
power in the Heavens, and in no wise can be defined by humane Tongues.
This is the beginning of the second part of that Oration spoken of before, 
which is of great virtue.
Aglaros, Theomiros, Thomitos, &c.
This is the second part of the precedent Oration, of which some singular thing
is to bespoken. Whereof if thou sayest this Oration, commemorating the first part
thereof, say the Oration following, and thou shalt perceive the precepts which are
therein.
Oh God of all things, who art my God, who in the beginning hast created all things
out of nothing, and hast reformed all things by the Holy Spirit; complete and restore my
conscience, and heal my understanding, that I may glorify thee in all my works, thoughts
and words. 
And after thou hast said this Oration, make a little respite the space of half an hour, and 
then say the third part of the Oration, which follows: 
Megal, Legal, Chariotos, &c.
Having said this third part of the Oration, then meditate with thy self about the Scriptures 
thou desirest to know; and then say this Oration.
Oh thou that art the Truth, Light, and Way, of all Creatures; Oh Just God, viv-
ify me, and confirm my understanding, and restore my knowledge and conscience
unto me, as thou didst unto King Solomon, Amen.
Commemorating the parts according to that which is laid down, add the Ora-
tion following: the other Orations being said, say the fourth part of the Oration,
which is this, Amasiel, Danyihayr, &c. 
Then the parts being commemorated as is directed, add also the following Oration.
I speak these things in thy presence, Oh Lord my God, before whose face all things
are naked and open, that I, being washed from the error of infidelity, thy all-quicking
Spirit may assist me, and take away all incredulity from me.


