SOURCE: Ars Notoria — angelic art of knowledge acquisition through prayer and notation
CHUNK: 6/6  |  CHARS: 119785-140603 of 140603
============================================================

h God my God, who from the beginning hast Created all things out of noth-
ing, and reformest all things by thy Spirit; restore my Conscience, and heal my
understanding, that I may glorify thee in all my thoughts, words and deeds; through
him who liveth and reigneth with thee forever, Amen.
Now in the Name of Christ, on the first day of the Month, in which thou
wouldst acquire Memory, Eloquence and Understanding, and stability thereof, with
a perfe, good and contrite Heart, and sorrow for thy sins committed; thou maist
begin to pronounce these Orations following, which appertain to the obtaining of
Memory and all Sciences, and which were composed and delivered by the Angel to
Solomon, from the hand of God.
The first and last Oration of this Art is Alpha and Omega: Oh God omnipo-
tent, &c.
This following is an Oration of four Languages, which is this: Hely, Schemat,
Azatan, honiel sichut, tam, imel, Iatatandema, Jetromiam, Theos: Oh Holy and strong
God, Hamacha, mal, Gottneman, Alazaman, zay, zojeracim, Lam hay, Masaraman,
grensi zamach, heliamat, seman, selmar, yetrosaman muchaer, vesar, hasarian Azaniz,
Azamet, Amathemach, hersomini. And thou most Holy and just God, incomprehensi-
ble in all thy works, which are Holy just and good; Magol, Achelmetor, samelsace, yana,
Eman, and cogige, maimegas, zemmael, Azanietan, illebatha sacraman, reonas, grome,


--- PAGE 48 ---
42
zebaman, zeyhoman, zeonoma, melas, heman, hathoterma, yatarmam, semen, semetary,
Amen. This Oration ought to follow the first of the ten above written.
To perform any work.
This is to follow the third Oration above: I confess, O Theos hazamagielgezuzan,
sazaman, Sathaman, getormantas, salathiel, nesomel, megal, vnieghama, yazamir, zeyha-
man, hamarnal amna, nisza, deleth, hazamaloth, moy pamazathoran, hanasuelnea, sacro-
momem, gegonoman, zaramacham Cades bachet girtassoman, gyseton palaphatos halathel
Osachynan machay, Amen.
This is a true and approved experiment, to understand all Arts and secrets of the
World, to find out and dig up minerals and treasure; This was revealed by the Heav-
enly Angel in this Notory Art. For this Art doth also declare things to come, and
rendereth the sense capable of all Arts in a short time, by the Divine use thereof.
We are to speak also of the time and place. First therefore, all these precepts are
to be observed and kept; and the Operator ought to be clean, chaste, to repent of his
sins, and earnestly desire to cease from sinning as much as may be; and so let him
proceed, and every work shall be investigated into him, by the Divine Ministery.
When thou wilt operate in the new Moon, kneeling say this verse: Lift up the
light of thy Countenance upon us, Oh God, and forsake us not, Oh Lord our God.
Then say three times the Pater Noster: And afterwards let him vow unto God that he
will never commit wilfull perjury, but alwayes persist in faith. This being done, at
night say with bended knees before thy bed; Our help is in the Name of the Lord,
&c. and this Psalm; Whoso dwelleth under the shadow of the wings of the most
high, to the end; and the Lords Prayer, and the Prayer following.
Theos Pater vehamans; God of Angels, I Pray and invocate thee by thy most
Holy Angels Eliphamasay, Gelomiros, Gedo bonay, Saranana, Elomnia, and by all the
Holy Names, by us not to be pronounced, which are these: do. el. x p n k h t li g y y.
not to be spoken, or comprehended by humane sense; I beseech thee, cleanse my
Conscience with the Splendor of thy Name; illustrate and confirm my understanding
with the sweet savour of thy Holy Spirit: Oh Lord Adorne my Soul, that I may
understand and perfely remember what I hear; reform my Heart, and restore my
Heart, and restore my sense Oh Lord God, and heal my bowels: open my mouth
most merciful God, and frame and temper my Tongue to the praise and glory of thy
Name, by thy glorious and unspeakable Name. O Lord, who art the Fountain of all
goodness, and original of all piety, have patience with me, and give unto me a true
understanding, to know whatsoever is fitting for me, and retain the same in Memory:
thou who dost not presently Judge a sinner, but mercifully expeest repentance; I
beseech thee, though unworthy, to wash away the filth of my sins and wickedness,
and grant me my petitions, to the praise and glory of thy Holy Name; who liveth and
reignest one God in perfe Trinity, World without end, Amen.


--- PAGE 49 ---
43
Some other precepts to be observed in this work.
Fast the day following with bread and water, and give Almes; if it be the Lords day,
then give double Almes; be clean in body and mind; both thy self, and put on clean
Cloaths.
The processe follows.
When thou wilt Operate concerning any difficult Probleme or Question, with
bended knees, before thy bed, make Confession unto God the Father; and having
made the Confession, say this Oration.
Send Oh Lord thy wisdome to assist me, that it may be with me, and labour
with me, and that I may alwayes know what is acceptable before thee; And that unto
me N. may be manifested the truth of this question or Art.
This being done, Thrice in the day following, when thou risest, give thanks to
God Almighty, saying; Glory and honour, and benediion be unto him that sitteth
on the Throne, and that liveth for ever and ever, Amen. with bended knees and
stretched out hands.
But if thou desirest to understand any book, ask of some that hath knowledge
therein, what that book treateth of: This being done, open the book, and read in it,
and operate as at first three times, and always when thou goest to sleep, write Alpha
and Omega, and afterwards sleep on thy right side, putting the palme of thy hand
under thy Ear, and thou shalt see in a dream all things thou desirest; And thou shalt
hear the voice of one informing and instruing thee in that book, or in any other fac-
ulty wherein thou wilt operate: And in the morning, open the book, and read therein;
and thou shalt presently understand the same, as if thou hadst studyed in it a long
time: And alwayes remember to give thanks to God, as aforesaid.
Afterwards on the first day say this Oration: Oh Father, Maker of all Creatures;
by the unspeakable power wherewith thou hast made all things, stir up the same
power, and come and save me, and prote me from all adversity of Soul and Body,
Amen. Of the Son, say, O Christ, Son of the living God, who art the Splendor and
Figure of light, with whom there is no alteration nor shadow of change; Thou Word
of God most high, thou wisdome of the Father; open unto me, thy unworthy servant
N., the veins of thy saving Spirit, that I may wisely understand retain in Memory,
and declare all thy wonders: Oh wisdome, who proceedest out of the mouth of the
most high, powerfully reaching from end to end, sweetly disposing of all things in
the World, come and teach me the way of prudence and wisdome. Oh Lord which
didst give thy Holy Spirit to thy Disciples, to teach and illuminate their Hearts,
grant unto me, thy unworthy servant N. the same Spirit, and that I may alwayes
rejoyce in his consolation.
Other precepts.
Having finished these Orations, and given Almes, when thou entrest into thy Cham-
ber, devoutly kneel down before thy bed, saying this Psalm: Have mercy upon me, O


--- PAGE 50 ---
44
God, according to the multitude of thy great mercies, &c. and, In thee Oh Lord have
I trusted, &c. Then rise up, and go to the wall, and stretch forth thy hands, having
two nayles fixed, upon which thou maist stay up thy hands, and say this Prayer fol-
lowing with great devotion: O God, who for us miserable sinners didst undergo the
painful death upon the Crosse; to whom also Abraham offer'd up his Son Isaac; I thy
unworthy servant, a sinner perplexed with many evils, do this day offer up and Sacri-
fice unto thee my Soul and Body, that thou maist infuse into me thy Divine wis-
dome, and inspire me with the Spirit of Prophesy, wherewith thou didst inspire the
Holy Prophets.
Afterwards say this Psalm; Oh Lord incline thine Ears unto my words, &c. and
add, The Lord is my Shepherd, and nothing shall I want: he shall set me down in
green pastures, his servant N., he shall lead me upon the waters of refreshment, he
coverteth my Soul, and leadeth me N., upon the paths of his righteousness for his
Holy Name: Let my evening Prayer ascend up into thee Oh Lord, and let thy mercy
descend upon me, thy unworthy servant N., prote, save, blesse, and sanify me,
that I may have a shield against all the wicked darts of my enemies: defend me Oh
Lord by the price of the blood of the just One, wherewith thou hast redeemed me;
who livest and reignest God, whose wisdom hath laid the foundation of Heaven &
formed the Earth, & placed the Sea in her bounds: and by the going forth of thy
Word hast made all Creatures, and hath formed man out of the dust of the Earth,
according to his own image and likeness; who gave to Solomon, the Son of King
David inestimable wisdome; hath given to the Prophets the Spirit of Prophesy, and
infused into Philosophers wonderful Philosophical knowledge, confirmed the Apos-
tles with fortitude, comforted and strengthened the Martyrs, who exalted his ele
from aeternity, and provideth for them; Multiply Oh Lord God, thy mercy upon me,
thy unworthy servant N., by giving me a teachable wit, and an understanding
adorned with virtue and knowledge, a firm and sound Memory, that I may accom-
plish and retain whatsoever I endevour, through the greatness of thy wonderful
Name; lift up, Oh Lord my God, the light of thy countenance upon me, that hope in
thee: Come and teach me, Oh Lord God, of virtues, and shew me thy face, and I
shall be safe. Then add this Psalm: Unto thee Oh Lord do I lift up my Soul: Oh my
God in thee do I trust; excepting that verse, Canfundantur, &c.
Having fulfilled these things upon the wall, descend unto thy bed, writing in thy
right hand Alpha and Omega: then go to bed, and sleep on thy right side, holding
thy hand under thy right Ear, and thou shalt see the greatness of God as thou hast
desired. And in the morning, on thy knees, before thy bed, give thanks unto God for
those things he hath revealed unto thee, I give thanks unto thee, Oh great and won-
derful God, who hast given Salvation and knowledge of Arts unto me, thy unworthy
servant N., and confirm this Oh God, which thou hast wrought in me, in preserving
me. I give thanks unto thee, O powerful Lord God, who createdst me, miserable sin-
ner out of nothing, when I was not, and when I was utterly lost; and not redeemed,
but by the precious blood of thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ; and when I was ignorant
thou hast given unto me learning and knowledge: grant unto me thy unworthy ser-


--- PAGE 51 ---
45
vant N., O Lord Jesus Christ, that through this knowledge, I may be always constant
in thy Holy service, Amen.
These Operations being devoutly compleated, give thanks daily with these last
Orations. But when thou wouldst read, study, or dispute, say, Remember thy word
unto thy servant, O Lord, in which thou hast given me hope; this is my comforter in
humility. Then add these Orations: Remember me O Lord of Lords, put good words
and speech into my mouth, that I may be heard efficaciously and powerfully, to the
praise, glory, and honor of thy glorious Name, which is Alpha and Omega, blessed
forever, World without end, Amen.
Then silently say these Orations.
O Lord God, that daily workest new signs and unchangable wonders, fill me
with the Spirit of wisdome, understanding and Eloquence; Make my mouth as a
sharp Sword, and my Tongue as an arrow eleed, & confirm the words of my mouth
to all wisdome: mollify the Hearts of the hearers to understand what they desire, Ely-
senach, Tzacham, &c.
The manner of Consecrating the Figure of Memory.
It ought to be consecrated with great faith hope and charity; and being consecrated,
to be kept and used in Operation as followeth.
On the first day of the new Moon, having beheld the new Moon, put the Figure
under your right Ear, and so consequently every other night, and seven times a day;
the first hour of the morning say this Psalm, Qui habitat, &c. throughout; and the
Lords Prayer once, and this Oration Theos Patyr once in the first hour of the day:
then say this Psalm, Confitebor tibi Domine, &c. and the Lords Prayer twice, and the
Oration Theos Patyr twice. In the third hour of the day say this Psalm Benedicicat
anima mea Dominum, &c. the Lords Prayer thrice, and the Oration Theos Patyr.
In the sixth hour say this Psalm: Appropinquet deprecato mea in conspectu tuo
Domine, secundun eloquium tuum.
Grant unto me Memory, and hear my voyce according to thy great mercy, and
according unto thy word grant Eloquence, and my lips shall shew forth thy majesty,
when thou shalt teach me thy Glory: Gloria patria, &c. Say the Lords Prayer nine
times, and Theos Patyr.
In the nineth hour say the Psalm Beati immaculati in via; the Lords Prayer 12
times, and Theos Patyr.
In the Evening say this Psalm, Deus misereatur nostri: the Lords Prayer 15 times,
and Theos Patyr as often.
The last hour say this Psalm, Deus Deus meus respice in me, &c., and Deus in adj-
utorium meum intende, and te Deum Lauadamus; the Lords Prayer once, and Theos
Patyr: then say the Oration following twice.
O God, who hast divided all things in number, weight, and measure, in hours,
nights and dayes; who countest the number of the Stars, give unto me constancy and


--- PAGE 52 ---
46
virtue, that in the true knowledge of this Art N., I may love thee, who knows the gifts
of thy goodness, who livest and reignest, &c.
Four days the Figure of Memory ought to be consecrated with these Orations.
O Father of all Creatures, of the Sun and the Moon.
Then on the last day let him bath himself, and put on clean garments, and clean
Ornaments,1 and in a clean place, suffumigate himself with Frankincense, and come
in a convenient hour in the night with a light kindled, but so that no man may see
thee; and before the bed upon your knees, say this Oration with great devotion.
O most great and most Holy Father, seven or nine times: then put the Figure with
great reverence about your Head; and sleep in the bed with clean linen vestments,
and doubt not but you shall obtain whatsoever you desire: for this hath been proved
by many, to obtain such coelestial secrets of the Heavenly Kingdom are granted,
Amen.
The Oration following ought to be said as you stand up.
O great God, Holy Father, most Holy Sanifier of all Saints, three and one, most
high King of Kings, most powerful God Almighty, most glorious and most wise Dis-
pensor, Moderator, and Governour of all Creatures, visible and invisible: O mighty
God, whose terrible and most mighty Majesty is to be feared, whose omnipotency
the Heaven, the Earth, the Sea, Hell, and all things that are therein, do admire, rev-
erence, tremble at, and obey.
O most powerful, most mighty, and most invincible Lord God of Sabaoth: O
God incomprehensible; the wonderful Maker of all things, the Teacher of all learn-
ing, Arts and Sciences; who mercifully Instruest the humble and meek: O God of
all wisdome and knowledge, in whom are all Treasures of wisdome, Arts and Sci-
ences; who art able instantly to infuse Wisdome, Knowledge and Learning into any
Man; whose Eye beholdeth all things past, present, and to come; who art the daily
Searcher of all hearts; through whom we are, we live and dye; who sittest upon the
Cherubins; who alone seest and rulest the bottomless pit: whose Word gives Law
throughout the universal World: I confess myself this day before thy Holy and glori-
ous Majesty, and before the company of all Heavenly virtues and Potentates, praying
thy glorious Majesty, invocating thy great Name, which is a Name wonderful, and
above every Name, blessing thee O Lord my God: I also beseech thee, most high,
most omnipotent Lord, who alone art to be adored; O thou great and dreadful God
Adonay, wonderful Dispensator of all beatitudes, of all Dignities, and goodness;
Giver of all things, to whomsoever thou wilt, mercifully, aboundantly and perma-
1. Lectisternium, a Robe in which the Priests used to sleep in the Temples, to receive the 
Divine Oracles. -- R.T.


--- PAGE 53 ---
47
nently: send down upon me this day the gift of the grace of thy Holy Spirit. And now
O most merciful God, who hast created Adam the first man, according to thy image
and likeness; fortify the Temple of my body, and let thy Holy Spirit descend and
dwell in my Heart, that I may shine forth the wonderful beams of thy Glory: as thou
hast been pleased wonderfully to operate in thy faithful Saints; So O God, most
wonderful King, and eternal glory, send forth from the seat of thy glorious Majesty a
seven-fold blessing of thy grace, the Spirit of Wisdome and Understanding, the
Spirit of fortitude and Counsel, the Spirit of knowledge and Godliness, the Spirit of
fear and love of thee, to understand thy wonderful Holy and occult mysteries, which
thou art pleased to reveal, and which are fitting for thine to know, that I may com-
prehend the depth, goodness, and inestimable sweetness of thy most immense
Mercy, Piety and Divinity. And now O most merciful Lord, who didst breathe into
the first Man the breath of life, be pleased this day to infuse into my Heart a true
perfe perceiving, powerful and right understanding in all things; a quick, lasting,
and indeficient Memory, and efficacious Eloquence; the sweet, quick and piercing
grace of thy Holy Spirit, and of the multitude of thy blessings, which which thou
bountifully bestowest: grant that I may despise all other things, and glorify thee
alone, the God of all things, the only true and perfe good, that I may forever glo-
rify, praise, adore, bless, and magnify thee the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and
alwayes set forth thy praise, mercy and omnipotency: that thy praise may alwayes be


--- PAGE 54 ---
48
in my mouth, and my Soul may be inflamed with thy Glory for ever before thee. O
thou, who art God omnipotents, King of all things, the greatest peace and perfeest
wisdome, ineffable and inestimable sweetness and delight, the unexpressable joy of
all good, the desire of all the blessed, their life, comfort, and glorious end; who was
from eternity, and is and ever shall be virtue invincible, without parts or passions;
Splendor and glory unquenchable; benediion, honor, praise, and venerable glory
before all Worlds, since and everlastingly time without end, Amen.
The following Oration hath power to expell all Lusts.
O Lord, Holy Father, omnipotent aeternal God, of inestimable mercy and immense
goodness; O merciful Jesus Christ, repairer and restorer of mankind; O Holy Ghost,
comforter and love of the faithful: who holdest all the Earth in thy fingers, and
weighest all the Mountains and Hills in the World; who dost wonders past searching
out, whose power there is nothing can resist, whose wayes are past finding out:
defend my Soul, and deliver my Heart from the wicked cogitations of this World;
extinguish and repress in me by thy power all the sparks of lust and fornication, that I
may more intentively love thy works, and that the virtue of the Holy Spirit may be
increased in me, among the saving gifts of thy faithful, to the comfort and salvation
of my Heart, Soul, and Body. O most great and most Holy God, Maker, Redeemer,
and Restorer of Mankind; I am thy servant, the Son of thy hand-maid, and the work
of thy hands: O most merciful God and Redeemer, I cry and sigh before the sight of
thy great Majesty, beseeching thee, with my whole Heart, to restore me, a miserable
sinner, and receive me to thy great mercy; give me Eloquence, Learning, and Knowl-
edge, that those that shall hear my words, they may be mellifluous in their Hearts;
that seeing and hearing thy wisdome, the proud may be made humble, and hear and
understand my words with great humility, and consider the greatness and goodness
of thy blessings, who livest and reignest now and forever, Amen.
Note, that if you desire to know anything that you are ignorant of, especially of
any Science, read this Oration: I confess myself to thee this day, O God the Father of
Heaven and Earth, three times; and in the end express for what you desire to be
heard; afterwards, in the Evening when you go to bed, say the Oration Theos
throughout, and the Psalm Qui Habitat, with this versicle, Emitte Spiritum; and go to
sleep, and take the Figure for this purpose, and put it under the right Ear: and about
the second or third hour of the night, thou shalt see thy desires, and know without
doubt that which thou desirest to find out: and write in thy right hand Alpha and
Omega, with the sign of the Cross, and put that hand under thy right Ear, and fast
the day before; only once eating such meat as is used on fasting dayes.
- Here endeth the Ars Notoria -
