SOURCE: Ars Notoria — angelic art of knowledge acquisition through prayer and notation
CHUNK: 4/6  |  CHARS: 70785-95785 of 140603
============================================================

: But
know, that in every day wherein you beholdest the Notes of Theology, Philosophy, or
of any Arts contained in them, that thou neither laugh nor play, nor sport; because
King Solomon, when he saw the forms of these Notes, having overdrunk himself,
God was angry with him, and spoke unto him by his Angel, saying, Because thou
hast despised my sacrament, and Polluted and derided my Holy things; I will take
away part of thy Kingdome, and I will shorten the dayes of thy Children. And the Angel


--- PAGE 32 ---
26
added, The Lord hath forbid thee to enter into the Temple 80 days, that thou maist repent
of thy sin. And when Solomon wept and besought mercy of the Lord, the Angel
answered, Thy dayes shall he prolonged; nevertheless many evills and iniquities shall come
upon thy Children, and they shall be destroyed of the iniquities that shall come upon them.
At the beginning of a Note, having seen the generals; let the specials be looked
into. The word of Solomon is to seek unto God for his promises, before the Notes of
the three Arts.
The first Oration at the beginning of the Note.
The Light, Truth, Life, Way, Judge, Mercy, Fortitude and Patience, preserve,
help me, and have Mercy upon me, Amen.
This Oration, with the preceding ought to be said in the beginning of the first
Note of Grammar. Oh Lord, Holy Father, Almighty, eternal God, in whose sight are
all the foundations of all creatures, and invisible beings whose Eyes behold my
imperfeions, of the sweetness of whose love the Earth and Heavens are filled; who
sawest all things before they were made, in whose book every day is formed, and all
mankind are written therein: behold me, thy Servant this day prostrate me before
thee, with thy whole Heart and Soul: by thy Holy Spirit confirm me, blesse me, pro-
te all my Aions in this inspeion or repetition, and illuminate me of thy visita-
tion.
The third Oration: This Oration ought to be said before the second Note of
Grammar. Behold, O Lord, merciful Father all things, eternal dispensor of all vir-
tues, and consider my operations this day; Thou art the Beholder and Discerner of all
the Aions of Men and Angels: Let the wonderful grace of thy promises condescend
to fufil this sudden virtue in me, and infuse such efficacy into me, operating in thy
Holy and great Name, thou who infusest thy praise into the mouths of them that
love thee, Amen.
The fourth Oration; Let this Oration be rehearsed before the third Grammati-
cal Note: O ADONAY, Creator of all visible Creatures! OH most Holy Father, who
dwellest incompassed about with eternal light, disposing and by thy power governing all
things before all beginnings; I most humbly beseech thy eternity and thy incomprehensible
goodness may come to perfection in me, by the operation of thy most Holy Angels; and be
confirmed in my Memory, and establish these, thy Holy works in me, Amen.
A little space after this Oration, say the following: the first Oration ought to be
said before the first Note of Logick. O Holy God, great good and the eternal Maker of all
things, thy Attributes not to be expressed, who hast Created the Heaven and the Earth, the
Sea and all things in them, and the bottomless pit according to thy pleasure; in whose sight
are the Words and Actions of all men: Grant unto me, by these Sacramental Mysteries of thy
Holy Angels, the precious knowledge of this art, which I desire by the Ministery of thy Holy
Angels, it being without any Malignant or Malicious intent, Amen.


--- PAGE 33 ---
27
Pronounce this Oration in the beginning of the first Figure of the Logick Art;
and after this Oration rehearse incontinently with some interval, the Orations written
between the first Figure.
The sixth Oration ought to be said before the first Note of the Diale; Helay:
Most Merciful Creator, Inspirer, Reformer, and Approver of all Divine Wills, Ordainer of
all things, Mercifully give ear to my Prayer, gloriously intend unto the desires of my heart,
that what I humbly desire, according to thy promises, thou wilt Mercifully grant, Amen.
This Oration following, ought to be pronounced before the first Note of the
Rhetorical Art: Omnipotent and merciful Father, Ordainer and Creator of all Creatures:
O most Holy Judge, eternal King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; who wonderfully conde-
scendest to give wisdom and understanding to the Saints, who judgest and discernest all
things: I beseech thee to illuminate my heart this day with the Splendor of thy Beauty, that I
may understand and know what I desire, and what things are considerable to be known in
this Art, Amen. This Oration , with the following Hanazay, &c. ought to be pro-
nounced before the first Figure of Rhetorick and although the they are divided only
the this cause, that there might be some mean interval used in the pronouncing of
them; and they ought to be pronounced before the other Orations written in the Fig-
ure.
Hanazay, Sazhaon, Hubi, Sene, Hay, Ginbar, Ronail, Selmore, Hyramay, Lobal,
Yzazamael, Amathomatois, Yaboageyors, Sozomcrat, Ampho, Delmedos, Geroch, Agalos,
Meihatagiel, Secamai, Sabeleton, Mechogrisces, Lerirenorbon.
The 8 Oration, let it be pronounced before the second Note of the Rhetorical
Art: Oh great eternal and wonderful Lord God, who of thy eternal counsel hast disposed of
all virtues, and art Ordainer of all goodness; Adorn and beautify my understanding, and
give unto me Reason to know and learn the Mysteries of thy Holy Angels: And grant unto
me all knowledge and learning thou hast promised to thy Servants by the virtue of thy Holy
Angels, Amen.
This Oration, with the other two following, ought to be pronounced (viz.
Vision, &c.) Azelechias, &c., in the beginning of the second Figure of Rhetorick, and
before the other Orations; and there ought to be some interval between them.
Let this Oration following be said, before the second Note of Rhetorick Vision;
beholding with thy eternal conspiration all Powers, Kingdoms and Judges, Adminis-
tering all manner of Languages to all, and of whose power there is no end; restore I
beseech thee, and increase my Memory, my heart and understanding, to know,
understand, and judge all things which thy Divine Authority commendeth necessary
in this art, perfely fulfill them in me, Amen.
Let this Oration following, with the precedent, be rehearsed before the second
Note of Rhetorick. Azelechias, Velozeos, Inoanzama, Samelo, Hotens, Sagnath, Adonay,
Soma, Jezoehos, Hicon, Jezomethon, Sadaot. And thou Oh God propitiously confirm
thy promises in me, as thou hast confirmed them by the same words to King
Solomon; send unto me, Oh Lord, thy virtue from Heaven, that may illuminate my
mind and understanding: strengthen, Oh God, my understanding, renew my Soul
within me, and wash me with the Waters which are above the Heavens; pour out thy


--- PAGE 34 ---
28
Spirit upon my flesh, and fill my bowels with thy Judgements, with humility and
charity: thou who hast created Heaven and the Earth, and made Man according to
thy own Image; pour out the light of thy love into my understanding, that being rad-
icated and established in thy love and thy mercy, I may love thy Name, and know and
worship thee, and understand all thy Scriptures, And all the Mysteries which thou
hast declared by thy Holy Angels, I may receive and understand in my Heart, and use
this Art to thy Honor and Glory, through thy mighty Counsel, Amen.
The 11 Oration ought to be said before the pronounciation of the third Note of
Rhetorick. I know, that I love thy Glory, and my delight is in thy wonderful works,
and that thou wilt give unto me wisdome, according to thy goodness and thy power,
which is incomprehensible: Theon, Haltanagon, Haramalon, Zamoyma, Chamasal,
Jeconamril, Harionatar, Jechomagol, Gela Magos, Kemolihot, Kamanatar, Hariomolatar,
Hanaces, Velonionathar, Azoroy, Jezabali; by these most Holy and Glorious profound
Mysteries, precious Offices, virtue and knowledge of God, complete and perfe my
beginnings and reform my beginnings, Zembar, Henoranat, Grenatayl, Samzatam,
Jecornazay: Oh thou great Fountain of all goodness, knowledge and virtue, given
unto thy Servant power to eschew all evil, and cleave unto goodness and knowledge,
and to follow the same with an Holy intention, that with my whole heart I may
understand & learn thy Laws and Decrees; especially these Holy Mysteries; wherein
that I may profit, I beseech thee, Amen.
12. This Oration ought to be said before the ninth Rhetorical Note: O most rev-
erend Almighty Lord, ruling all Creatures both Angels and Archangels, and all Celestial,
Terrestrial, and Infernal Creatures; of whose greatness comes all plenty, who hast made
man after thy own Image; Grant unto me the knowledge of this Art, and strengthen all Sci-
ences in me, Amen.
13. Pronounce this before the first Figure of Arithmetick: Oh God who numbrest,
weighest, and measurest all things, given the day his order, and called the Sun by his name;
Grant the knowledge of this Art unto my understanding, that I may love thee, and
acknowledge the gift of thy goodness, Amen.
14. Say this before the semi-note of Arithmetick: Oh God, the Operator of all
things, from whom proceeds every good and perfect gift; sow the Seeds of thy Word in my
Heart, that I may understand the excellent Mysteries of this Art, Amen.
15. Say this before the second Figure of Arithmetick: Oh God the perfect Judge of
all good works, who maketh known they saving goodness among all Nations; open my Eyes
and my heart, with the beams of thy mercy, that I may understand and persever, in these
thy Heavenly Mysteries, Amen.
16. This Oration before the second Note of Geometry: Oh God, the giver of all
wisdome and knowledge to them that are without sin, Instructor and Master of all Spiri-
tual learning, by thy Angels and Arch-Angels, by Thrones, Potestates, Principates and
Powers, by Cherubim and Seraphim, and by the 24 Elders, by the 4 Animals, and all the
host of Heaven, I adore, invocate, worship and glorify thy Name, and exalt thee: most terri-
ble and most merciful, I do humbly beseech thee this day to illuminate and fill my Heart
with the grace of thy Holy Spirit, thou who art three in one, Amen.


--- PAGE 35 ---
29
17. Say this Oration before the second Note on Theology. I adore thee, O King of
Kings, my light, my substance, my life, my King, and my God, my Memory, and my
strength; who in a Moment gavest sundry Tongues, and threwest down a Mighty Tower,
and gavest by thy Holy Spirit the knowledge of Tongues to thy Apostles, infusing thy
knowledge into them in a Moment, giving them the understanding of all Languages:
inspire my Heart, and pour the dew of thy grace and Holy Spirit into me, that I may
understand the Exposition of Tongues and Languages, Amen.
Three Chapters to be published, before any of the Notes.
What we have spoken of the three first Chapters are generally and specially to be
pronounced, so that you say them, and the Orations on the dayes appointed, and
work by the Notes as it is demonstrated to you. These Orations ought to be said
alwayes before noon, every day of the Moneth; and before the Notes say the proper
Orations: and in all reading, observe the precepts commanded.
How the Proper Notes are to be inspected.
lf you would learn anything of one Art, look into the proper Notes thereof in their
due time. Enough as said already of the three liberal Arts.
What days are to be observed in the inspection of the Notes of the four Arts.
In the four other Arts, only the first dayes are to be observed: The Philosophical
Notes, with all Sciences contained therein, the 7 and 17 dayes of the Moon are to be
inspeed, 7 times a day, with their several Orations. The Note is to be looked into,
with fear, silence and trembling.
Of the Notes of the liberal Arts, it is spoken already; but only know this, that
when you would use them, live chaste and soberly; for the Note hath in itself 24
Angels, is fully and perfely to be pronounced, as you have heard: but when you look
into them, repeat all the Theological Orations, and the rest in their due time.
Of the inspection of general Notes.
Say the general Notes 10 times a day, when you have occasion to use any common
Arts, having the books of those Arts before you, using some interval or space of time
between them, as you have been taught already.
How the three first Chapters are to be pronounced before Orations.
To have perfeion herein, know, that in the general pronounciation of Orations, the
Notes of the three heads are to be rehearsed; whether the Orations be pronounced or
not.
How the fifth Oration of Theology ought to be rehearsed upon these Orations.
There is also something else to be said of the four other liberal Arts; if you would
have the perfe knowledge of them, make the first Oration of Theology before you


--- PAGE 36 ---
30
say the Orations of the other Notes. These are sufficiently declared, that you might
understand and know them; And let the the capitular Orations be pronounced before
the several Notes of every Art, and kept as is determined, &c. These are the Aug-
mentations of the Orations, which belong to all Arts, liberal and exceptive, except
Mechanick, and are especially ascribed to the Notes of Theology. And they are thus to
be pronounced, that whensoever you look into any one Note of any Art, and would
profit therein, say these Orations following.
1. Ezamamos, Hazalat, Ezityne, Hezemechel, Czemomechel, Zamay, Zaton, Ziamy
Nayzaton, Hyzemogoy, Jeccomantha, Jaraphy, Phalezeton, Sacramphal, Sagamazaim,
Secranale, Sacramathan, Jezennalaton Hacheriatos, Jetelemathon, Zaymazay, Zamaihay
Gigutheio Geurlagon, Garyos. Mega'on Hera Cruhic, Crarihuc, Amen.
Let this Oration with the following be pronounced before the first Note of Phi-
losophy: Oh Lord God, Holy Father, Almighty and incomprehensible; hear my
Prayers, thou that art invisible, immortal and intelligible, whose face the Angels and
Arch-Angels, and all the powers of Heaven, do so much desire to see; whose Majesty
I desire eternally to adore, and honor the only one God for ever and ever. Amen.
2. Say this before the second Note of Philosophy: Oh Lord God, Holy and
Almighty Father, hear my Prayers this day, and incline thy ears to my Orations;
Gezomelion Samach, Semath, Cemon, Gezagam, Gezatrhin, Zheamoth, Zeze Hator
Sezeator Samay Sannanda, Gezyel, Iezel, Gaziety, Hel, Gazayethyhel, Amen.
Say this following with the former: Oh God eternal, the way, the truth, and the
life; give thy light and the flower of thy Holy Spirit into my mind and understanding,
and grant that the gift of thy grace may shine forth in my heart, and into my Soul,
now and forever, Amen.
Pronounce the Oration following before the third Note of Philosophy; Lem-
ogethom, Hegemochom, Hazachay Hazatha, Azamachar, Azacham, Cohathay, Geomothay
Logomothay, Zathana, Lachanma, Legomezon, Legornozon, Lembdemachon, Zegomaday,
Haihanayos, Hatamam, Helesymom, Vagedaren, Vadeyabar, Lamnanath, Lamadai,
Gomongchor, Gemecher, Ellemay, Gecromal, Gecrohahi, Colomanos, Colomaythos, Amen.
Say this Oration following with the precedent Oration: Oh God the life of all
visible Creatures, eternal brightness, and virtue of all things; who art the original of
all piety, who knewest all thing before they were; who judgest all things, and discer-
neth all things by the unspeakable knowledge: glorify thy Holy and unspeakable
Name this day in my heart, and strengthen my intelleual understanding; increase
my Memory, and confirm my eloquence; make my tongue ready, quick, and perfe
in thy Sciences and Scriptures, that by thy power given unto me, and thy wisdome
taught in my heart, I may praise thee, and know and understand thy Holy Name for
ever World without end, Amen.
Say this Oration following before the fourth Note of Philosophy. Oh King of
Kings, the Giver and Dispenser of infinite Majesty, and of infinite mercy, the
founder of all foundations; lay the foundation of all thy virtues in me, remove all
foolishness from my heart, that my senses may be established in the love of thy char-


--- PAGE 37 ---
31
ity, and my Spirit informed by thee, according to the recreation and invocation of thy
will, who livest and reignest God throughout all Worlds of Worlds, Amen.
How these Orations are to be said every day once before the general Note,
and the Notes of the liberal Arts.
These 4 Orations are necessary for liberal Arts, but chiefly do appertain to Theology,
which are to be said every day before the general Notes, or the Notes of the liberal
Arts; but to Theology say every one of these 7 times to every Note; but if you would
learn or teach anything of diating, versifying, singing or Musick, or any of these
Sciences, first teach him these Orations, that thou wouldst teach, how he should read
them: but if he be a Child of mean understanding, read them before him, and let him
say after thee word for word; but if he be of a good understanding, let him read them
7 times a day for 7 days: or if it be a general Note, pronounce these Orations, and the
Virtue thereof shall profit you much, and you shall therein find great virtue.
Solomon saith of these Orations, Let no man presume to make use of them
unless for the proper Office they are instituted for. Oh Father, incomprehensible,
from whom proceedeth everything that is good; whose greatness is incomprehensi-
ble: hear this day my Prayers, which I make in thy sight, and grant to me the Joy of
thy saving health, that I may teach unto the wicked the wayes and Paths of thy Sci-
ences, and convert the Rebellious & incredulous unto thee, that whatsoever I com-
memorate and repeat in my heart and mouth, may take root and foundation in me;
that I may be made powerful and efficacious in thy works, Amen. 
Say this Oration before the 6 Note of Philosophy; Gezemothon, Oronathian,
Heyatha, Aygyay, Lethasihel, Iaechizliet, Gerohay, Gerhomay, Sanoaesorel, Sanasathel,
Gissiomo, Hatel, Segomasay, Azomathon, Helomathon, Gerochor, Hojazay, Samin, Heliel,
Sanihelyel, Siloth, Silerech, Garamathal, Gesemathal, Gecoromay, Gecorenay, Samyel,
Samihahel, Hesemyhel, Sedolamax, Secothamay, Samya, Rabiathos, Avinosch, Annas,
Amen.
Then say the following: Oh eternal King! O God, the Judge and discerner of all
things, knower of all good Sciences; instru me this day for thy Holy Names sake,
and by these Holy Sacraments; and purify my understanding, that thy knowledge
may enter into my inward parts, as water flowing from Heaven, and as Oil into my
bones, by thee, Oh God Saviour of all things, who art the fountain of goodness, and
original of piety; instru me this day in those Holy Sciences which I desire, thou
who art one God for ever, Amen. 
Oh God Father, incomprehensible, from whom preceedeth all good, the great-
ness of whose mercy is fathomless, hear my Prayers, which I make this day before
thee, and render unto me the joy of thy Salvation, that I may teach the unjust the
knowledge of thy wayes, and convert the unbelieving and Rebellious unto thee; and
may have power to perform thy works, Amen.


--- PAGE 38 ---
32
The 7 Oration, which is the end of the Orations, belonging to the ineffable Note, the last of 
Theology, having 24 Angels.
Oh God of all piety, Author and Foundation of all things, the eternal Health and
Redemption of thy People; Inspirer and great Giver of all graces, Sciences and Arts,
from whose gift it cometh: Inspire into me thy servant, an increase of those Sciences:
who hast granted life to me miserable sinner, defend my Soul, and deliver my Heart
from the wicked cogitations of this World; extinguish and quench in me the flames
of all lust and fornication, that I may the more attentively delight in thy Sciences and
Arts; and give unto me the desire of my Heart, that I being confirmed and exalted in
thy Glory, may love thee: and increase in me the power of thy Holy Spirit, by thy
Salvation and reward of the faithful, to the Salvation of my Soul and Body, Amen.
Then say this following. Oh God, most mighty Father, from whom proceedeth
all good, the greatness of whose mercy is incomprehensible; hear my Prayers, that I
make in thy sight.
Special precepts of the Notes of Theology, chiefly of the 1. 2. and 3.
These 7 Orations are to be an augmentation of the rest, and ought to be said before
all the Notes of Theology, but especially before the ineffable Note; these are the pre-
cepts to make thee sufficient, which we command thee to observe by the authority of
Solomon: diligently inquire them out, and do as we have proposed, and perfely pro-
nounce the Orations, and look into the Notes of the other Arts.
How Solomon received that ineffable Note from the Angel.
Because thou desirest the Mystery of the Notes, take this of the ineffable Note, the
expression whereof is given in the Angels by the Figures of Swords, birds, trees,
Flowers, Candles and Serpents; for Solomon received this from the Lord in the night
of Pacification, ingraven in a book of Gold; and heard this from the Lord: Doubt
not, neither be affraid; for this Sacrament is greater then all the rest; And the Lord
joyned it unto him, When thou look'st into this Note and read'st the Orations
thereof, observe the precepts before, and diligently look into them; And beware that
thou prudently conceal and keep whatsoever thou read'st in this Note of God, and
whatsoever shall be revealed to thee in the vision. And when the Angel of the Lord
appeareth to thee, keep and conceal the words and writings he revealeth to thee; and
observe them to praice and operate in them, observing all things with great rever-
ence, and pronounce them at the appointed dayes and hours, as before is direed;
and afterwards say; Sapienter die illo; Age, & caste vivas. But if thou dost anything
uncertain, there is danger; as thou wilt have experience from the other Notes and
Orations of them, but consider that which is most wonderful in those Orations; for
these words are ineffable Names, and are spiritually to be pronounced before the
ineffable Note, Hosel, Jesel, Anchiator, Aratol, Hasiatol, Gemor, Gesameor. Those are the
Orations which ought to be pronounced after the inspeion of all the Arts, and after
the Note of Theology.


--- PAGE 39 ---
33
This is the fulfilling of the whole work; but what is necessary for an experiment
of the work, we will more plainly declare. In the beginning of the knowledge of all
Arts there is given almost the perfe Dorine of operating: I say almost, because
some flourishing institutions hereof remain, whereof this is the first beginning.
How the Precepts are to be observed in the operation of all Arts.
Observe the 4  in every operation of Theology. Exhibit that operation with effi-
cacy every 4  quartram lunam; and diligently look into the books and writings of
those Arts; if thou doubt of any of the Chapters, they are to be pronounced, as is
taught of the superior Chapters; but know this, that these Holy Words of Orations,
we appoint to be said before the bed of the sick, for an experiment of life or death.
And this thou maist do often, if thou wil to perate nothing else in the whole body of
Art: And know this; that if thou hast not the books in thy hands, or the faculty of
looking into them is not given to thee; the effe of this work will not be the lesse
therefore: but the Orations are twice then to be pronounced, where they were to be
but once: And as to the knowledge of a vision, and the other virtues which these
Holy Orations have; thou maist prove and try them, when and how thou wilt.
These Precepts are specially to be observed.
But when thou would'st operate in Theology, observe only those dayes which are
appointed; but all times are convenient for those Notes and Orations, for which there
is a competent time given; but in the pronounciation of the three liberal Arts, or in
the inspeion of their Notes, perhaps thou maist pretermit some day appointed, if
thou observe the rest; or if thou transgress two dayes, leave not off the work, for it
loseth not its effe for this, for the Moon is more to be observed in the greater num-
bers than the dayes or hours. For Solomon saith, If thou miss a day or two, fear not,
but operate on the general Chapters. This is enough to say of them: but by no means
forget any of the words which are to be said in the beginning of the reading to attain
to Arts; for there is great virtue in them. And thou maist frequently use the Holy
Words of the visions: but if thou wouldst operate in the whole body of the Physical
Art, the first Chapters are first to be repeated as before are defined. And in Theology,
thou must operate only by thy self: Often repeat the Orations, and look into the
Notes of Theology: this produceth great effes. It is necessary that thou have the
Note of the 24 Angels always in Memory; and faithfully keep those things, which the
Angel reveales to thee in the vision.
The Experiment of the precedent work, is the beginning of the following Orations, which 
Solomon calleth Artem Novam.1
These Orations may be said before all Art