SOURCE: Ars Notoria — angelic art of knowledge acquisition through prayer and notation
CHUNK: 3/6  |  CHARS: 46948-71285 of 140603
============================================================

the parts according to that which is laid down, add the Ora-
tion following: the other Orations being said, say the fourth part of the Oration,
which is this, Amasiel, Danyihayr, &c. 
Then the parts being commemorated as is directed, add also the following Oration.
I speak these things in thy presence, Oh Lord my God, before whose face all things
are naked and open, that I, being washed from the error of infidelity, thy all-quicking
Spirit may assist me, and take away all incredulity from me.


--- PAGE 24 ---
18
How the Latine Orations are not expounded by the words of the Orations.
We are therefore to know, that the whole Oration remaineth unexpounded; because
the words thereof are of so great subtilty, adorned with the Hebrew and Chaldean
Tongue, with the subtile and wonderful Elocution of God: that the Office of the free
Exposition thereof, cannot possibly be transferred upon me. The Latine words which
are subjoyned to the parts of the Oration aforesaid, are such words as have been
translated out of the Chaldean Tongue: for they are not the whole Oration; but as
certain Heads of every Oration pertaining thereunto.
Here he speaketh of the efficacy of all these.
For this Oration is such a Mystery, as King Solomon himself witnesseth, that a Ser-
vant of his house having found this book by chance, and being too much overcome
with Wine in the company of a Woman, he presumtuously read it; but before he had
finished a part thereof, he was stricked dumb, blind and lame, and his Memory taken
from him; so he continued to the day of his death: and in the hour of his death, he
spoke and said, that four Angels which he had offended in presumtuous reading so
sacred a mystery, were the daily keepers and affliers, one of his Memory, another of
his speech, a third of his sight, and the fourth of his hearing.
By which Testimony this Oration is so much commended by the same King
Solomon, and great is the Mystery thereof: we do greatly require and charge every
one, that will say or read it, that he do it not presumptuously; for in presumption is
sin; Wherefore let this Oration be said, according as is direed.
We therefore hold it convenient and necessary, to speak something of the gen-
eral precepts of art, and of the knowledge of all arts; and of the several precepts of
every singular art: but because we have touched something of the course of the
Moon, it is necessary that we shew what her course signifies. The Moon passeth
through 12 Signs in one Moneth; and the Sun through 12 Signs in a year; and in the
same term and time, the Spirit inspireth, fruifieth and illustrateth them; whence it
is said, that the Sun and the Moon run their course: it is understood the course
which first they had. But because this is wanting in the Hebrew, we thought good to
omit it in the Latine, having spoken sufficiently of the preceding Oration, and the
three parts thereof.
In this Chapter he sheweth the efficacy of the subsequent Oration,
it being special to obtain Eloquence.
This Holy Oration which followeth, is a certain special Oration, to obtain Elo-
quence; whereas all others have virtue and efficacy in other things, this containeth
this certain special mystery in it self: and whereas one of the generals is shewing in it
self, certain general precepts, common to all arts; for so God instituted the Soul in
the Body, saying; This I give to you, that ye may keep and observe the Law of the
Lord; And these are they that stand in the presence of God alwayes, and see their
Savior face to face night and day: So of this Oration, I say, This is that most glorious,


--- PAGE 25 ---
19
mystical and intelligible Oration, containing such mysteries in it, which the mind,
conscience and tongue succeedeth. This is such a mystery, that a man shall keep it
according to his will, who foreseeth all things in his sight that are made; for the mys-
tery of this Oration is glorious and Sacramental: let no man presume to say any of
this Oration after too much drinking or Luxury; nor fasting, without great reverence
and discretion. Whence Solomon saith; Let no man presume to treat anything of this
Oration, but in certain determinate and appointed times, unless he make mention of
this Oration before some great President, for some weighty business; for which this
Oration is of wonderful excellent virtue.
The goodness of this Oration, and the attaining to the effes thereof, it is read
in that Psalm wherein it is said, Follow me, and I will make you Fishers of Men, as
he said and did.
We know that it is not of our power, that this Oration is of so great Virtue, and
such a mystery as sometimes also the Lord said to his Disciples, This we are not able
to know: for this Oration is such a mystery, that it containeth in it the great Name of
God; which many have lied in saying they knew it; for Jesus himself performed many
Miracles in the Temple by it: But many have lyed about what he did, and have hid
and abandoned the truth thereof; so that none have declared the same before it came
to passe: but we suppose have spoken something about or concerning it.
In this Chapter he setteth down the time and manner how this Oration is to be pronounced.
For this Oration is one of the generals, and the first of particulars, containing both in
it self; having a special virtue and faculty, to gain Eloquence in it self: therefore it is
necessary to be understood what time, ordination, and what dayes it is to be said and
published.
It may always be rehearsed in every 14 Lunary as above said; but the ordination
of the time for every day, wherein it is to be said, is especially in the morning betimes,
before a man is defiled; and then all Orations are chiefly to be said. And this Oration
must be then pronounced totally together, without any division. And although there
are divisions therein, the Oration is not divided in itself; but only the Divine and
Glorious Names are written severally, and are divided into parts, according to the ter-
minations of every great and Glorious name; and it is to be said together as a most
excellent name, but not as one Word, because of the fragility of our nature; Neither is
it needful to know the Elements of syllables, posited in this Oration; they are not to
be known; neither let anyone presumptuously speak them; neither let him do any
thing by way of temptation, concerning this Oration, which ought not to be done:
Elmot, Sehel, Hemech, Zaba, &c.
No Man that is impedited or corrupted with any crime ought to presume to say this 
Oration.
This is a thing agreed unto amongst the wise men of this World, that these things, as
we have said before, be pronounced with great reverence and industry: it may be said


--- PAGE 26 ---
20
every day, wherein thou art not hindered by some criminal sin; and in that day
wherein thou art impedited by some criminal sin, thou maist remember it in thy
heart; and if thou dost desire to be made Eloquent, repeat it three times. And if any
evil thing trouble thee, or thou art emerged and involved into any great business,
repeat this Oration once, and Eloquence shall be added to thee, as much as is needed;
and if thou repeat it over twice, great Eloquence shall be given to thee: so great a Sac-
rament is this Oration.
The third thing to be considered in this Oration, is; This Oration ought so to be
pronounced, that confession of the Heart and Mouth ought to precede it: let it be
pronounced in the morning early, and after that Oration say the Latine Oration fol-
lowing.
This is a Prologue or Exposition of the precedent Oration, which ought to be said together.
Oh omnipotent and eternal God, and merciful Father, blessed before all Worlds;
who art a God eternal, incomprehensible, and unchangeable, and hast granted this
blessed gift of Salvation unto us; according to the omnipotency of thy Majesty, hast
granted unto us; the faculty of speaking and learning, which thou hast denied to all
other animals; and hast disposed of all things by thy infallible providence: thou art
God, whose Nature is eternal and consubstantial, exalted above the Heavens; in
whom the whole Deity corporally dwells: I implore thy Majesty, and Glorify thy
omnipotency, with an intentive imploration, adoring the mighty Virtue, Power, and
Magnificence of thy eternity. I beseech thee, Oh my God, to grant me the inestima-
ble Wisdom of the Life of thy holy Angels. Oh God the Holy Spirit, incomprehen-
sible, in whose presence stand the Holy quires of Angels; I pray and beseech thee, by
thy Holy and Glorious Name, and by the sight of thy Angels, and the Heavenly
Principalities, to give thy grace unto me, to be present with me, and to give unto me
power to persevere in the Memory of thy Wisdom, who livest and reignest eternally
one eternal God, through all worlds of worlds; in whose sight are all Celestial Vir-
tues, now and alwayes, and everywhere, Amen.
This Oration being thus finished, there must of necessity some Mystery be
added; so that you are to be silent a while after the Latine Oration is ended: and after
a little taciturnity, that is, a little space of silence, begin to say this Oration following
seriously: Semet, Lamen, &c.
This (saith Solomon) is the Oration of Orations, and a special experiment,
whereby all things, whether generals or particulars, are known fully, efficaciously and
perfely, and are kept in the Memory. But when thou hast by this Oration attained
the Eloquence thou desirest, be sparing thereof, and do not rashly declare those
things which thy Tongue suggests and administers to thee; for this is the end of all
general Precepts, which are given to obtain Memory, Eloquence, and understanding,
All those things which are before delivered, of general precepts, are given as signs
how the faculty of attaining to the understanding of the general precepts may be had,


--- PAGE 27 ---
21
which also Solomon calleth Spirituals; and those singular arts have singular virtues
and powers.
Having now given a sufficient definition of general precepts; and the Orations
are laid down, and the Authority of the Orations unto what they are designed; It is
now necessary to set down what is to be done, concerning the singular Orations;
because we are now to treat of the several and particular arts, that we may follow the
example which our builder and Master hath laid before us; for Solomon saith, before
we proceed to the singular Notes and Orations of Arts before noted, there ought to
be said a Preludium, which is a beginning or Prologue.
How every several Art hath its proper note.1
Before we proceed to the singular precepts of several Arts, it is necessary to discover
how every several Art hath a several Note.
Of the Liberal Sciences and other things, which may be had by that Art.
The Liberal Arts are seaven, and seaven exceptives, and seaven Mechanicks. The
seaven exceptives are comprehended under the seaven liberal: It is manifest what the
seaven Liberal Arts are, of which we shall first treat. The Mechanicks are these,
which are adulterately called Hydromancy, Pyromancy, Nigromancy, Chiromancy, Geo-
mancy, Geonegia, which is comprehended under Astronomy and Neogia.
Hydromancy is a science of divining by the Water; whereby the Masters thereof
judged by the standing or running of the Water. Pyromancy is an Experiment of
divining by the flaming of the fire; which the ancient Philosophers esteemed of great
efficacy. Nigromancy is a Sacrifice of dead Animals, whereby the Ancients supposed
to know many great Experiments without sin, and to attain to great knowledge: from
whence Solomon commandeth that they might read seaven Books of that Art without
sin; And that two he accompted Sacriledge, and that they could not read two Books
of that Art without sin. But having spoken enough hereof, we proceed to the rest.
Of the Liberal Sciences and other things which may be had thereby.
There are seaven Liberal Arts, which everyone may learn without sin. For Philoso-
phy is great, containing profound Mysteries in itself: These Arts are wonderfully
known.
He declareth what Notes the three first Liberal Arts have.
For Grammar hath three Notes only, Dialects two, and Rhetorick four, and every one
with open and distin Orations. But wherefore Grammar hath three, Dialects two,
and Rhetorick four; that we know King Solomon himself testifieth and affirmeth; for
he saith, And as I was admiring and revolving in my heart and mind, which way,
from whom and from whence was this Science, an Angel brought one Book, wherein
1. This section begins part II of the manuscript, concerned with the acquisition of the skills 
pertaining to the specific Liberal Arts.


--- PAGE 28 ---
22
was written the Figures and Orations, and delivered unto me the Notes and Orations
of all Arts, plainly and openly, and told me of them all as much as was necessary:
And he explained unto me, as to a Child are taught by certain Elements; some
tedious Arts in a great space of time, how that I should have these Arts in a short
space of time: Saying unto me, So shalt thou be promoted to every science by the
increase of these Virtues. And when I asked him, Lord, whence and how cometh
this? The Angel answered, This is a great Sacrament of the Lord, and of his Will:
this writing is by the power of the Holy Ghost, which inspireth, fruifieth and
increaseth all knowledge; And again the Angel said, Look Upon these Notes and
Orations, at the appointed and determinate times, and observe the times as
appointed of God, and no otherwise. When he had thus said he shewed to King
Solomon a Book wherein was written, at what times all these always were to be pro-
nounced and published, and plainly demonstrated it according to the Vision of God:
Which things I have heard and seen, did operate in them all, according to the Word
of the Lord by the Angel: And so Solomon declareth, it came to pass unto him: But
we that come after him, ought to imitate his Authority, as much as we are able to
observe those things he hath left unto us.
Here Solomon sheweth how the Angel told him distinctly, wherefore the Grammar hath 
three Figures.
Behold wherefore the Grammatical Art hath only three Notes in the Book of
Solomon; Gemeliath, that is, in the Book of the Art of God, which we read is the Art
of all other Sciences, and of all other Arts; For Solomon saith, When did I inquire
everything singularly of the Angel of God, with fear, saying, Lord, from whence shall
this come to passe to me, that I may fully and perfely know this Art? Why do so
many Notes appertain to such an Art, and so many to such an Art, and are ascribed
to several determinate Orations, to have the efficacy thereof? The Angel is thus said
to answer: The Grammatical Art is called a liberal Art, and hath three things neces-
sary thereunto; Ordination of words and times; and in them, of Adjuns or Figures;
Simple, compound and various; and a various declination of the parts to the parts, or
a relation from the parts, and a Congruent and ordinate division. This is the reason,
why there is three Notes in the Art of Grammar: And so it pleased the Divine Wis-
dom, that as there should be a full knowledge of declining by one; by another, that
there should be had a convenient Ordination of all the parts; by the third, there
should be had a continual and convenient Division of all the parts, simple and com-
pound.
The Reason why the Dialectical Art hath two Figures onely.
Dialect, which is called the form of Arts, and a Dorinal speech, hath two things
necessary thereunto, to wit, Eloquence of Arguing, and Prudence to answer; There-
fore the greatness of the Divine Providence and Piety, hath appointed two Notes to
it; that by the first, we may have Eloquence to Argue and Dispute; and by the sec-


--- PAGE 29 ---
23
ond, industry to answer without ambiguity: Wherefore there are ascribed to Gram-
mar three Notes, and to Dialect two Notes.
The Reason why Rhetorick hath four Figures.
Let us see wherefore Rhetorick hath four Notes. For there are four things necessary
therein; as the Angel of the Lord said unto Solomon; to wit, a continual and flourish-
ing adornment of locution, An ordinate, competent and discreet judgement, a Testi-
mony of Causes or Offices, of Chances & Losses, a composed disposition of buying
and selling; An Eloquence of the matters of that Art, with a demonstrative under-
standing. Therefore the greatness of God hath appointed to the Art of Rhetorick four
Notes, with their Holy and Glorious Orations; as they were reverently sent by the
Hand of God; that every Note in that Art aforesaid, might have a several faculty,
That the first Note in that Art, might give a continual locution, a competent and flo-
rishing adornment thereof: The second, to discern Judgements, just and unjust, ordi-
nate and inordinate, true and false: The third, competently to discover offices and
causes: and the fourth giveth understanding and Eloquence in all the operations in
this Art, without prolixity. See therefore how in Grammar, Logick, and Rhetorick,
the several Notes are disposed in the several Arts.
But of all the other Arts and their Notes, we shall speak in their due place and
time, as we find them disposed in the book of the same Solomon.
At what times and hours the Notes of these three Liberal Arts are to be looked into.
Now we proceed to shew at what time, and how the Notes of these Arts are to be
looked into, and the Orations to be said, to attain to these Arts. If thou art altogether
ignorant of the Grammatical Art, and wouldst have the knowledge thereof: if it be
appointed thee of God to do this work of works, and have a firm understanding in
this Art of Arts; then know that thou maist not presume to do otherwise than this
book commandeth thee; for this book of his shall be thy Master, And this Art of his
thy Mistress.
How the Grammatical Notes are to be looked into in the first Moon.
For in this manner, the Grammatical Notes are to be looked into, and the Orations
to be said.
In the dayes when the Moon is in her prime, the first Note is to be looked into
12 times, and the Oration thereof repeated 24 times with Holy reverence; making a
little space between, let the Oration be twice repeated at the inspeion of every
Note, and chiefly abstain from sins: do this from the first day of the Moon to the 14,
and from the 14 to the 17. The first and second Notes are to be looked into 20 times,
and the Oration to be repeated 30 times, on the 15 and 17 dayes, using some interval
between them, All the three Notes are then everyday to be looked into 12 times, and
the Orations are to be repeated 20 times: and thus of the Notes of the Art of Gram-
mar. But if thou hast read any books of this Art, and desirest perfeion therein, do as


--- PAGE 30 ---
24
is commanded; using the general Orations to Increase Memory, Eloquence, under-
standing and perseverance therein, repeating these above in the due time and hours
appointed; lest that going beyond thy precept, thou commitest sin: but when thou
dost this, see that it be secret to thy self, and that thou have no looker on but God.
Now we come to the Notes.
Here followeth the knowledge of the Notes.
In the beginning of the inspeion of all Notes, fast the first day till the evening, if
you can; if thou canst not, then take another hour. This is the Grammatical precept.
Of the Logical Notes.
The Dialeical Notes may be used every day, except only in those dayes before told
of: The Rhetorical every day, except only three dayes of the Moneth, to wit, . 11. 17.
and 19. And they are forbidden on these dayes, as Solomon testifies, the Notes of all
Arts, except the Notes of this Art are offered. These precepts are generally to be
observed.
How the Logical Notes are to be inspected, and the Orations thereof said.
Know, that the Dialeical Notes are four times to be looked into, and the Orations
thereof in that day are 20 times to be repeated, making some respite, and having the
books of that Art before your Eyes; and so likewise the books of Rhetorick, when the
Notes thereof are inspeed, as is appointed. This sufficeth for the knowledge of the 3
Arts.
How we must beware of offences.
Before we proceed to begin the first Note of the Art of Grammar, something is to be
tryed before, that we may have the knowledge of the 1, 2 and 3 Notes. And you ought
first to know, in what the Notes of the Grammatical, Logical, or Rhetorical Art are
to be inspeed, it being necessary that your greatest intentions be to keep from all
offences.
How the Notes ought to be inspected, at certain elected times.
This is a special and manifest knowledge, wherewith the Notes of the Grammatical
Art are known: how they are to be published, at what times, and with what distin-
ion, is duly and competently manifest; it is spoken already of the publishing and
inspeion of the Notes and Orations: now we shall digress a little to speak some-
thing of the times, it being in part done already.
How diverse Months are to be sought out in the inspection of the Notes.
We have spoken already of the tearms of this Art, wherein the Orations are to be
read, and the Notes to be looked into: it remaineth to declare how the Lunations of


--- PAGE 31 ---
25
these Orations are to be inspeed and found out. But see that you mistake not: yet I
have already noted the Lunations, wherein the Notes ought to be looked into, and
the Orations rehearsed: But there are some Months, wherein the Lunation is more
profitable than others: if thou wouldst operate in Theology or Astronomy, do it in a
fiery sign; if Grammar or Logick, in  or : if Musick or Physick, in  or ; if
Rhetorick, Philosophy, Arithmetick or Geometry, in  or : for Mathematicks, in
 or : so they are well placed, and free from evil; for all Heavenly Potestates and
Chorus of Angels, do rejoyce in their Lunations, and determinate dayes.
Here is made mention of the Notes of all Arts.
I, Apollonius, following the power of Solomon, having disposed my self to keep his
works and observations, as it is spoken in the three Notes of Grammar, so will I
observe the times as they are to be observed: But the Orations thereof are not writ-
ten, but are more fully demonstrated in the following work; for what is written of
those three Notes, are not Orations, but Definitions of those Notes, written by the
Greek, Hebrew, and Chaldean, and other things which are apprehended by us: For
those writings which are not understood in Latine ought not to be pronounced, but
on those dayes which are appointed by King Solomon, and in those dayes wherein the
Notes are inspeed, but on those dayes those Holy writings are always to be
repeated: and the Latine, on those dayes wherein the Notes are not inspeed. The
Notes of the Logical Art are two: and at what times they are to be published is
already shewn in part: more shall hereafter be said of them: now we come first to the
rest. The Latine writings may be published, according to the Antiquity of the
Hebrews, except on those dayes we have spoken of: for Solomon saith, See that thou
perform all those precepts as they are given: But of the rest that follow, it is to be
done otherwise: for when thou seest the first Note of Logick, repeat in thy heart the
sign in the first Note, and so in the Notes of all Arts, except those whereof a defini-
tion shall be given.
Definitions of several Arts, and the Notes thereof.
We will give also Definitions of several Arts, as it is in the Book of Solomon; Geome-
try hath one Note, Arithmetick a Note and a half; Philosophy, with the Arts and Sci-
ences contained therein, hath 7 Species; Theology and Astronomy, with the Sciences
in them contained, hath 7 Notes, but they are great and dangerous; not great in the
pronunciation, but have great efficacy: Musick hath one Note, and Physick one
Note; but they are all to be published and rehearsed in their appointed dayes: But
know, that in every day wherein you beholdest the Notes of Theology, Philosophy, or
of any Arts contained in them, that thou neither laugh nor play, nor sport; because
King Solomon, when he saw the forms of these Notes, having overdrunk himself,
God was angry with him, and spoke unto him by his Angel, saying, Because thou
hast despised my sacrament, and Polluted and derided my Holy things; I will take
away part of thy Kingdome, and I will shorten the dayes of thy Children. And the Angel


