SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 18/39  |  CHARS: 407563-431715 of 925451
============================================================

ed on this ring’ and then addresses them twice by name. 
When the declaration is repeated, the address is sometimes replicated exactly as 
it was first given, but frequently the later declarations addresses merely the 
‘aforesaid demons’ (prenominatos demones ), as often as ten or eleven times in a 


single conjuration.- When multiple demons are being conjured they are usually 
all named, but one conjuration addresses the demon Lylet along with her 
companions ( socii ), who remain unnamed.- 

In divinatory experiments, not only the informing spirits but also the boy 
serving as the necromancer’s medium are often conjured to tell the truth. In such 
cases the conjuration is addressed to the boy simply as puer (no. 22) or, more 
often, as ‘young virgin’ or ‘virginal youth’ (virgo iuuenis).- Less often, objects 
used in the experiments are at times conjured and thus addressed: an image or a 
cloak. Power-bearing names are also addressed (‘O ye most holy names’).- Two 
experiments have conjurations addressed to the spirit who has taken the form of 
a horse.- In most contexts, the beings whose support is most needed and whose 
resistance is most feared are the spirits, and they are thus the ones chiefly subject 
to the magician’s conjuration. 


The invocations 

As the fundamental source of efficacy by which a conjuration works, the 
invocations call upon the sacred power of numinous beings, names and events, 
power that can be wielded against the addressees and can make them to carry out 
the master’s will. For example, a conjuration in one experiment (no. 7) invokes 
the power of God; events in the life of Christ; various sacred personages (Mary, 
the saints, then specifically the apostles, martyrs, confessors, virgins, and 
widows); the sacred names of God (which bring great fear to ‘all things in 
heaven, on earth, and in hell’); the power of the demons’ own princes, kings, 
lords, and superiors; the spirits’ own powers; their habitation, of which the circle 
is a representation, and ‘all the figures present within it’, although in fact there 
are no figures thus depicted. The invocations are strung together in a manner 
reminiscent of a litany, in most cases between two and eight in a single 
conjuration, but not uncommonly as many as twenty-four. Only four 
experiments, all divinatory and involving the cooperation of a child medium, 
have conjurations with more than twenty-four invocations, and one of these runs 
to fully fifty-eight.- 

Invocations can be found in mainstream Christian prayers from the late 
Middle Ages as well as in conjurations. The Obsecro te found in the Little Office 
of the Blessed Virgin, invoked Mary by the joy she experienced at the 
Annunciation, by the tender care with which the Son of God entered her womb, 
by the joys she had in her Son, by the compassion she felt before the cross, and 


so forth.- The difference is that here the events are conceived as having 
psychological force: they are persuasive because they are remembered, and the 
point of the prayer is to call them to the Virgin’s mind so that, moved by the 
recollection of what she herself experienced, she will have compassion on those 
for whom the events of Christ’s life were performed - just as Christ himself is 
reminded of his Passion in the Dies irae and urged to mercy so that his suffering 
may not be in vain. In magical conjurations, the sacred persons, events, and 
objects cited serve more as powerful but impersonal weapons in a contest of 
wills, by which the magician may gain the upper hand over an unwilling spirit - 
as arma nigromantica, so to speak. A closer orthodox equivalent would be the 
petitions in the Litany of the Saints in which Christ is asked to ‘free’ humanity 
{libera nos, domine ) by the successive acts of his life and death (per natiuitatem 
tuam, and so forth), but here the wording posits a natural and objective 
relationship between the sacred events and the desired effect: the normally 
expected effect of Christ’s passion and death is to redeem humankind, not to 
give necromancers power over demons. Although the invocations are often by 
far the lengthiest in the elements of a conjuration, their meaning thus depends on 
the far shorter wording of the declaration and the instruction. If the purpose of 
the invocations is to call upon the sacred power of persons, objects and events, 
this power is like electricity, capable of running the most various machines and 
working diverse effects, both beneficent and brutally maleficent. 

The subjects whose power is invoked fall into nine general categories. The 
examples given here are more than merely illustrative - they include the most 
common and significant cases within each category - but not exhaustive: 


1. God: 

‘by God’ (no. 20) 

‘by the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit’ (no. 11) 

‘by the undivided and inseparable Trinity in which are three persons, namely the Father, and the 
Son, and the Holy Spirit, who proceeds from both’ (no. 8) 

‘by the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, to which every name is bowed [sic - cf. Phil. 2:10] 
and every tongue proclaims Hosanna’ (no. 11) 

‘by the living and true God’ (no. 25) 

‘by Him who is everlasting and eternal, and by Him who gave us the grace not to stand in Hell’ 
(no. 8) 

‘by God almighty, by Jesus Christ his Son, and by his Trinity, and by that providence which God 
had in [His] mind before the world was made, by the wisdom of God’s eternity by which he made 
heaven stand above and established and perfected the world below ... and by the prudence by which 
God separated light from darkness and created both, by the Word of God by which he made heaven 
and earth ...’ (no. 39) 

‘by the creator of heaven and earth, and by Him who created all things for the praise and glory of 


his name, and by the living God, and by the holy God, and by the true God’ (no. 43) 

‘by the virtue and power of the divine majesty’ (no. 3) 

‘by the ineffable virtue and omnipotence of the creator’ (no. 33) 

2. Sacred names for God or Christ: 

‘by the names which strike fear and terror in you’ (no. 3) 

‘by the holy names by whose power you are bound’ (no. 1) 

Tetragrammaton (passim ) 

Adonay (nos 1, 7, 10, 13, 23, 25, 27, 28, 33, 35, 39) 

El (nos 14, 28, 33, 39) 

Ely (nos 7, 14, 23, 25, 27, 28, 35) 

Eloy (nos 25, 27, 28, 33, 35, 39) 

Alpha et O (nos 10, 25, 27, 28, 33, 39) 

Emanuel (nos 20, 23, 23, 25, 27, 28, 33, 39) 

Messyas (nos 7, 10, 23, 27, 28, 39) 

Soter (nos 7, 10, 25,27, 28,39) 

Sabaoth (nos 1, 5, 7, 10, 13, 23, 25, 27, 33, 35, 39) 

62 unspecified names of Christ (no. 39) 

99 names spoken by the daughters of Israel (no. 33) 

3. Events from the life of Christ (usually emphasizing the Passion): 

‘by the Incarnation of Our Lord Jesus Christ; by the baptism of Christ; by the fast of Christ; by 
the death of Christ; by the Passion of Christ; by the resurrection of Christ; by the ascension; by the 
coming of the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete’ (no. 40) 

‘by the annunciation of Our Lord Jesus Christ; by the sacred fast of Our Lord Jesus Christ; by the 
baptism of Our Lord Jesus Christ; by the temptation of Our Lord Jesus Christ; by the passion of Our 
Lord Jesus Christ; by the 1,006 wounds of Our Lord Jesus Christ; by the 106 wounds of Our Lord 
Jesus Christ; by the 56 wounds of Our Lord Jesus Christ, not including the others from his head to 
his feet; by the crown of thorns which they placed on the head of Our Lord Jesus Christ, and they 
knelt down [and] mocked him, saying “Hail, king of the Jews”; by the reed and the blows with 
which they struck Christ; and by the three nails; by the lance with which the sacred body of Our 
Lord Jesus Christ was pierced, and at once blood and water flowed out; by the outburst of the 
holiness of Our Lord Jesus Christ, “Into thy hands I commend my spirit’” (no. 38; cf. no. 39) 

4. The saints: 

‘by all the holy men and holy women [sanctos et sanctas ] of God’ 

‘by the four evangelists, Luke, Mark, Matthew, [and] John; by the four sermons; by the twelve 
apostles; by the three magi, Caspar, Balthasar, [and] Melchior; by the patriarchs [and] prophets; by 
the martyrs and confessors; and by all the popes of Rome, and all the virgins and widows; and by all 
the bishops; and by all the abbots; by all the priors; by all the provosts; by all the archdeacons; and 
by all deacons; by all monks; by all nuns; by all priests; by all deacons and subdeacons; by all the 
saints of God; by the merits of all the saints; by all the Christian people; and by all the saints who 
are in heaven and on earth; and by the 144 thousand innocents ... ’ (no. 38) 

‘by the faith of the prophets, by the proclamations of the patriarchs, by the dignity of the twenty- 
four elders, by the creed of the apostles, by the passion of the martyrs, by the confessing of the 
confessors, by the chastity of the virgins, by the gospels of the evangelists ... ’ (no. 39) 
by the virginity of Mary, John the Evangelist, Catherine, Agatha, Cecilia, and Barbara (nos 27, 
28).— 

‘by all the bodies of the saints that lie in Rome’ (no. 12) 


5. The Virgin Mary: 

'by Saint Mary the virgin’ (no. 29) 

'by the gracious and most merciful and undefiled and uncorrupt virgin Mary, the mother of Our 
Lord Jesus Christ, who, dying for us wretched sinners, called us to the heavenly fatherland’ (no. 7) 
by her virginity (no. 28) 
by her tears (no. 40) 
by her milk (no. 12) 

by her names - Queen, Flower, Rose, Lily, Ladder, Wisdom, Life, Sweetness, Mercy, and Hope 
(no. 10) 

6. The angels: 

'by the angels and archangels, thrones and dominations, principalities, powers, virtues of the 
heavens, cherubim and seraphim’ (no. 40) 

'by the thrones, dominations, powers, and principalities of Our Lord Jesus Christ; and by all the 
angels and archangels who dwell before the throne of God, crying out with one voice, “Holy, holy, 
holy, Lord God of Sabaoth, heaven and earth are full of your glory. Hosanna in the highest. Blessed 
is he who comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest.’” (no. 9) 

‘by the nine orders of angels’ (no. 29) 

by the archangels Michael, Gabriel and Raphael (no. 38) 

7. Material creatures: 

'by all things that were and are and will be’ (no. 2) 

'by all things that exist beneath the heavens’ (no. 35) 

'by all the powers of heaven and earth’ (no. 35) 

'by heaven and earth, by the sea, by all things that are in them, by all emperors, by all kings, by 
all princes, by all counts, by all knights, by all citizens’ (no. 38) 

'by all things that the four parts of the world contain, and by the ages of the world, and by all 
animals that exist beneath the heavens, and by serpents and flying things, bipeds, tripeds, 
quadrupeds’ (no. 40) 

'by heaven and earth, the sea and hell, and all things existing in them’ (no. 11) 
by the heavenly and earthly Paradise (no. 10) 

'by the eternity of all creatures’ (no. 5) 
by the five secula and seven etates of the world (no. 39) 

'by the Sun and Moon and all the heavenly stars, and by all those things which have [power] to 
frighten and constrain you, and by the power of which it behoves you to come to us who summon 
you’ (no. 6) 

'by all things which have [power] to terrify, constrain, and bind you, and whose command it 
behoves you to fulfill completely’ (no. 11) 

'by your virtue and power, and by all things that have power against you’ (no. 11) 
by the sacraments of baptism (no. 33) 
by the eucharist (nos 12, 38, 39) 
by the four rivers of Paradise (no. 8) 

8. The Last Judgement: 

‘by the fearful day of judgement’ (no. 35) 

‘by the fearful day of judgement of God most high, and by the fiery consumption, and by the 
glassy sea which is before the gaze of the divine majesty, and by the four animals ... before the 
throne of the divine majesty, with eyes before and behind’ (no. 33) 

'by the fearful day of judgement, on which you are all to be damned’ (no. 40) 



9. The rulers of the demons: 

‘by Toth, your prince; by Zambrim et Mambrim; by Vsuel [and] by Saduel, to whom you are held 
to obey and tell the truth’ (no. 33) 

‘by the power and dignity of Lucifer, Aphaleon and Neutrion’ (no. 8) 

‘by your master Astaroth’ (no. 40) 

‘by all your princes, kings, lords and superiors, and by your hell, and by all those things that exist 
in it’, (no. 10) 

‘by the virtue and power of all your princes, kings, lords and superiors, and by your [own] virtue and 
potentiality and potency [ possibilitatem ac potenciam ], and by your dwelling place, of which this 
[circle] is a form, and by all the figures abiding in it’ (no. 7) 

The invocations used by far most often and consistently are those in the first two 
categories - those appealing to the power of the divine persons, powers and 
names. Of these, the most common is the Tetragrammaton, the nomen 
altissimum in no. 14, spelled Tetragramaton (nos 1, 10, 13, 14, 25, 27, 28, 35), 
and also produced as Y-V-E and HX-V-V-HV, while Y-V-E-X is given as a name 
used by Abraham (no. 33).- The most extended and perhaps the most interesting 
series of invocations referring to the divine names is one (no. 33) with thirty-one 
specific names associated with events from salvation history, particularly the 
Exodus: 

We exorcise and command you by the most mighty and potent name of God, 
El, strong and wondrous; by Him who spoke and it was made; by all his 
names; and by the Name YVE, which Moses heard and spoke ... and by the 
name YVEX, and with the name [Y]V[E]X, which Abraham heard, and he 
knew the almighty God; and by the name Joth, and with the name Joth, which 
Jacob heard from the angel accompanying him, and he was freed from the 
hand of his brother Esau; and by the name Eyzaserie, and with the name 
Eyzaserie, which Moses heard on the mountain, and he merited to be now 
with God, and to hear him speaking in the flame; and by the name 
Anathematon, and with the name Anathematon, which Aaron heard, and he 
became eloquent and wise ... 

This conjuration proceeds to invoke the names the names Sabaoth, Oristion, 
Eloy, Yephaton, Arbitrios, Elyon, Adonay, Pantheon and Arimon, by which 
Moses caused the plagues in Egypt; Geremon, by which he freed the Israelites; 
Yegeron, by which he divided the Red Sea; Anabona, by which he merited to 
receive the tablets of the law; Egyryon, by which Joshua overcame his foes; 
Patheon, by which David was saved from Goliath, and so on.- 

Names for Christ are sometimes derived from biblical images, especially in 


one extended series (no. 39): 

Messyas, Sother, Emanuel, Sabaoth, Adonay, Panthon, Panthocrathon, Eloy, 
Theos, Hon, Vision, Saviour, Alpha and Omega, First and Last, First Born, 
Beginning and End, way, truth, and wisdom, virtue, Paraclete, 1 am who am, 
who are, mediator, lamb, sheep, ram, calf, serpent, kid, Word, image, glory, 
grace, salvation, light, salt, peace, splendour, bread, font, vine, shepherd, 
prophet, undying hope, king, father, almighty, merciful, eternal, highest good, 
Trinity, unity, Father, El, Eloy, Eloe, Eleon, Saday, Symator, Tu, Ye, Ye, 
Prince of Peace, Enstriel, spirit, fear, goodness, thou, unity of unities, 
threefold godhead. 

Occasionally names for God are derived from Hebrew or Greek liturgical 
formulas: AGLA (no. 33), the common magical abbreviation for the Hebrew Ata 
gibor leolam Adonai (‘Thou art mighty for ever, O Lord’); Theos (no. 39), 
Yschiros (no. 28), and Athanatos (nos 28, 33), names derived from the liturgical 
trisagion, taken over into the Latin liturgy of Good Friday in the original Greek); 
Eleyson (no. 28), from the Kyrie eleison. Other names derived from Greek titles 
are ho on (nos 14, 23, 27, 28, 33) or simply Hon (no. 25) (‘The Existing One’), 
and Pancraton (nos 28, 33) or Panthocrathon (no. 39), presumably variants on 
Pantocrator, ‘the Almighty’ or ‘Ruler of All’.— 

In short, what Joseph Raster says about mastery of the divine names in 
ancient Egyptian ritual applies in Jewish and Christian contexts as well: 
‘whoever knows the god’s real name, secret and ineffable and taboo, has control 
over him in the sense that he can evoke his power. In all ceremonial magic, the 
essential portion of the spell is the calling forth of the spirit or deity by name; 
when he is evoked by his real name, he must work the desire of the magician 
who “controls” him. This is “a name to conjure with”.’- 

On occasion the names of the demons, like those of God and Christ, are 
represented as possessing power: one invokes the demonic names Apolyn, 
Gebel, Astaroth, Tereol, Falmar and Tyroces (no. 5); another has an invocation 
‘by the name of your highest prince’ (no. 27). 

Certain conjurations invoking events from the life of Christ make explicit 
what is presumably implied elsewhere, that they are calling not so much upon 
the events themselves as upon the power manifested in the events: ‘by the power 
by which Our Lord Jesus Christ entered in to his disciples when the doors were 
closed’ (no. 35); ‘by the power of Our Lord Jesus Christ, to wit that for us 


humans he descended from heaven and was born of the virgin Mary, suffered 
under Pontius Pilate ... ’ (no. 38). 

On rare occasions the invocations appeal to the very practice of magic, 
whether historical or present: spirits are conjured by ‘all the experiments of 
Virgil [the necromancer]’ (no. 38),— by the ring brought for the experiment (no. 
3), or by the magical circle used for the experiment, ‘by which you are 
effectively called forth’ (no. 9). In view of the magical powers often ascribed to 
Solomon, it is not surprising to find his rings invoked, along with the signs and 
names inscribed on them (nos 28, 33); his seven signs, his seal, and his 
characters (nos 27, 38); or his wisdom (nos 12, 30, 38). M Often the invocations 
show a preference for saints grouped in threes: most especially the three magi, 
Caspar, Balthasar and Melchior; also the three young men Sydrac, Mysaach and 
Abdenago and the three patriarchs Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.- The virgin child 
medium conjures spirits by his own virginity, and the master conjures him by the 
virginity he has maintained and the baptism he has received (nos 27, 28). 

When Oriens is conjured, the invocations refer to his own dignities and 
subordinate spirits: ‘by your kings, and by all your royal powers; by Sotuem 
[and] Sortfen; by your Sun, a most holy and sacred radiant treasure, bright and 
shining, which your excellence sends forth and which your manifest and benign 
power sends back; and by all your dignities and commands’ (no. 41). 

A conjuration from the supplementary material in Clm 849 commands the 
demons by virtue of two biblical analogies: 

O you demons, and all princes and every kind of demons, whom your guilt 
cast out from heaven on high, I adjure you and order you to obey my 
command and my precepts. Just as God commanded the Jordan and it stood 
still that the children of Israel might walk across without hindrance, so to I 
command you to obey my precepts day and night, at all hours and moments, 
[and be subject] to my precepts. Just as the Red Sea obeyed Moses and Aaron 
when it divided and presented a dry path for the children of Israel, so by 
invocation of Our Lord Jesus Christ I command you to obey me without 
delay, without harm or deception to me or any living thing 

The Rawlinson necromantic manuscript, too, uses analogies in some of its 
conjurations: as Christ was ‘fixed’ to the cross by the Jews, so may the aerial 
spirits be ‘fixed’ by the power of the holy names; as the almighty Father (sic!) 
lay in the tomb for two days and arose on the third day, so may the aerial spirits 


rise up and come forth; may the master proceed securely along his way, as Jesus 
proceeded through the midst of his enemies and none of them laid a hand on him 
because his hour had not come.- These formulas are similar in form to 
invocations, and presumably the intended force is the same: the purpose of the 
analogy is presumably not only to clarify what the conjurer intends (in which 
case it would be ancillary to the instruction) but to call upon the power of the 
sacred event that is recalled. 


The instruction 

The part of the conjuration directing the addressee what to do is typically 
introduced with the conjunction meaning ‘that’ (ut, or sometimes quatenus, more 
rarely quod). The formula of instruction may be repeated once, twice, or more 
often (in one conjuration for experiment no. 39 as many as ten times), in which 
case the manuscript may give the full version only the first time and only the 
incipit for subsequent occurrences.- Necromantic texts sometimes speak of 
‘obediencial conjurations’, intended to compel the spirits’ submission; ‘bonds’ or 
binding conjurations such as the ‘bond of Solomon’ {vinculum Solomonis ), used 
in the Munich handbook’s divinatory experiments to keep the spirits from 
departing until they have answered all questions;- and ‘licencial conjurations’, 
dismissing the spirits and requiring them to return at the magician’s will.- The 
conjurations found in the Munich handbook, however, can most usefully be 
divided into ‘summoning conjurations’ and ‘executing conjurations’. 

Summoning conjurations are used to instruct a spirit or spirits to come before 
the necromancer (‘that you come in a benign form’, ‘that you should come to 
me’, ‘that you should have no rest until you come to me’, ‘that you should at 
once proceed here’, or ‘that you should be compelled to come here’).- They may 
be commanded to appear in a reflecting surface as part of a divinatory 
experiment (‘that you should all appear’) or to send another spirit or spirits for 
that purpose (‘that you should command your master that he himself should 
come’, ‘that you should take pains to send one of your subordinates’, ‘that you 
should send me a certain spirit’, ‘that you should have your subordinates come 
here’, ‘that you, N., should make spirit N. come to me’).- 

Executing conjurations, which require the spirit or spirits to carry out the will 
of the master, are more varied in proportion to the various purposes of the 
experiments. In psychological experiments the spirits are enjoined to affect the 
minds and hearts of the individuals singled out as victims (‘that you should sow 


and stir up hatred between them’, ‘that you should seduce the heart and mind of 
N. to my love’, ‘that you should never have rest until you make her heart burn 
with my love’).- In divinatory experiments involving a young boy as medium, 
either the master or the boy may conjure the father of lies or his minions to tell 
the truth, or the master may conjure the boy himself to do so (‘that you should 
relate to us whatever you see’, ‘that you should tell me the truth’, ‘that you 
should show me the truth’, ‘that you should have no rest unless you reveal to this 
boy the thief and the theft’).- The spirits may be instructed to make possible the 
conditions for the bestowal of information - to enlighten the boy’s mind, or to 
cause his fingernail to grow bright and appear large.- These conjurations may 
even involve the explicit insistence that the spirit or the child not lie, nor even 
have the power to conceal or deceive (‘that you should have no power of 
concealing, but should manifest all that you see’).- The spirits may be conjured 
to entrust a treasure to the master (‘that you should leave me a treasure’), to fetch 
and replace a woman (‘that you should go to so-and-so and immediately fetch 
her here, and return her when I wish’), to guard some object, not to harm the 
master in the course of the experiment (‘that you should have no power to harm 
me’), to protect the master (‘that you should forthwith have these terrors 
removed’, ‘that you should avenge me against him who is trying to harm me’), 
or to obey the master’s command generally (‘that you should obey my 
command’).- The child medium may be conjured not only to tell the truth but, at 
an earlier stage, to gaze into his fingernail (‘that you should gaze into [your] nail 
and see whether it becomes bright or not’).- 

