SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 15/39  |  CHARS: 334837-359753 of 925451
============================================================

e 
true God Basyon, and by the name[s] On, Berion, Sabaoth, [and] 
Adonay, [etc.], to have no power of concealing from me, but to manifest 
all that you see.’ 

When you have recited these conjurations three times, if the spirits do 
not hasten to your service, add this conjuration: ‘You demons from the 
east, you demons from the west, you demons from the south, you 
demons from the north, open up to us, Discobermath, Archidemath, 
Fritath, Altramat, Pestiferat, Helyberp, Hegergibet, Sathan.’ 

When you have spoken or repeated this conjuration three times, the 
boy will see all things clearly. 



This experiment is good also if someone wishes to know the condition 
of his friends, whether they are well or ill, and it will determine whether 
or not they are under way. 

The conjuration over the strap is as follows. When mass has been 
finished on any particular day, say this conjuration over the strap: T 
conjure you, Sona, by the name of the Lord Tetragrammaton, and by the 
name of God Joth, and by the name of God Nabnoth, [etc.], to receive 
such power that wherever you are bound, these spirits will have no 
power to withdraw until they fulfil the will of the one who binds.’ 

The second chapter begins with a lengthy conjuration summoning the spirits 
to appear in the boy’s nail, and is followed by another conjuration 
commanding the boy to gaze into his nail and tell the truth about what is 
there revealed. The text continues: 

Then ask the boy if the nail is brighter than before. If he says not, read 
the conjuration again from the beginning, and a third time if necessary. If 
he says it has become brighter, ask if he sees anything. If he says he sees 
a man, the master should have the boy conjure the one he sees, in the 
mother tongue, as follows: ‘You who are before me, I conjure you by the 
Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and by Saint Mary and her 
virginity, and by Saint John and his virginity, [etc.], to go quickly for 
your king and have him come before me, so that I may see and 
understand him clearly.’ 

Then ask the boy if the king has come. If not, have the boy conjure 
again, as before. If he has come, have the boy tell the king to dismount 
from his horse and have a throne brought forth on which he can sit. Then 
have the boy ask the king if he wishes to eat. If he says no, then ask 
about whatever you will. If he says yes, have the boy tell the king to send 
wherever he will for a ram to be skinned and cooked, and then he should 
have a table set, and should rise and wash his hands, and sit at the table 
and have the ram set before him, and he should go ahead and eat it. After 
he has eaten, he should get up, take water, and wash his hands. 

Then have the boy tell the king to remove the crown from his head 
and place his right hand on top of his head and swear by his crown and 
by his sceptre and by that which he holds beneath his right hand, to 
respond truly to all the master’s questions. Then the master should ask 



whatever he wishes, through the boy. After the master’s questions have 
been answered properly, the spirits may be given licence to leave, and the 
boy should say, ‘Go. Peace be between us and you. And when the master 
calls you, be prepared to obey him in all things and by all things.’ 

The conception of a demon as a king or prince is not uncommon (see 
Chapter 7), and it is in keeping with the dignity of the spirit that he is 
allowed the privilege of a throne and a meal, although he supplies them 
himself, within the scene played out on the fingernail of the medium. 
Elsewhere as well the spirits may be instructed or invited to seat themselves 
on thrones; in the Rawlinson manuscript the medium is told to have three 
white-robed spirits fetch three gold thrones for themselves.- It is perhaps 
not surprising that apparitions as elaborate as these might require repeated 
conjuration. No doubt they also assumed child mediums of exceptional 
virtuosity, and a master who had found such a child must have been proud 
indeed to have discovered such a resource. 

Simpler experiments involving fingernails or thumbnails 

While the preceding experiment is more complex than most, others 
resemble it in their essentials. In experiment no. 30, the master obtains a 
powder by burning resin and collecting the ash from the bottom of a basin 
that is inscribed with certain characters. He anoints four joints of the boy’s 
left hand with olive oil and with this powder, in alternation, until the boy’s 
fingers shine like a mirror. (Johannes Hartlieb gives a similar account of 
how child mediums are instructed to gaze not only into their fingernails but 
into their hands anointed with oil and soot from a pan.-) Then he summons 
twelve spirits. Three times the master makes the sign of the cross with his 
right thumb on the boy’s forehead, each time praying that Christ himself 
may sign the boy, as he gave his blessing at Cana. Then he repeats the 
twelve names, and may make the sign of the cross on his own forehead as 
well as the boy’s. The names are recited until six spirits appear on the boy’s 
hand. Then the boy commands them to sit, except for one, who is to rise and 
answer the master’s questions. When the spirits have answered the master’s 
questions, the boy commands them to depart, in the name of the Trinity; if 
he wishes, the master may at this point sign the boy’s forehead again. 

The next three experiments all take place within a simple circle, 


consisting of three concentric bands, within which the boy sits on a three- 
legged stool, around which are inscriptions (the boy’s name, other names, 
the Tetragrammaton).- In no. 38 the master blesses the boy while waving a 
sword around his head. He gives the sword to the boy, then signs him with 
the sign of the cross (saying, ‘May the cross sanctify you, and may the 
prayers of all priests bless you’), scrapes his nails with a knife, anoints them 
with olive oil, then blesses himself and his companions, who sit silently by 
the circle, with swords in hand. The boy shuts his eyes; the master blesses 
all those present by reading the opening verses of John’s gospel. The boy 
looks at his anointed nail and conjures specified demons to make the nail 
grow large and bright so that various information can appear in it: the thief, 
the circumstances of the theft, and the place where the stolen object is 
concealed. The master conjures certain demon princes to come in the form 
of black men and appear in the boy’s nail. If the boy cannot yet see any 
figures in his nail, the master repeats the conjuration. He asks the boy if he 
sees a demon leaping and rejoicing. The master and his companions speak 
to the boy to keep him from fear. Again the master conjures the demons to 
divulge the desired information. At the end of the experiment, the master 
rubs his fingernail clean with his tunic, and makes the sign of the cross over 
four parts of his body with the sword. Then the boy takes the sword and 
holds it before himself while leaving the circle. The companions and the 
master himself exit in the same manner. 

In no. 39 the master scrapes the boy’s right thumbnail, using a knife with 
a handle of black or white horn, and recites psalm verses. He then signs the 
boy’s forehead with the sign of the cross, says a prayer asking God to have 
the boy tell the truth, and whispers the names of demons three times into the 
boy’s right ear. Then he enters the circle and stands in front of the boy, 
anoints his nail with olive oil, gives him the knife, and recites a longer series 
of demons’ names. He conjures the demons (repeatedly, if necessary) to 
make the boy’s nail grow large and bright, so that the details of the theft will 
appear in it. When this happens, the master conjures the demons (again as 
often as needed) to come and appear to the boy in the forms of the thieves. 
When the demons appear, the master conjures them to give the boy power, 
so that he can make the necessary inquiry and behold the desired 
information. Afterward the master has the boy close his eyes, then he cleans 
his nail, signs him with the sign of the cross {super eum, ante eum , and retro 
eum ), takes the knife from his hand, blesses both himself and the boy, erases 


the circle, and departs along with the boy. The ‘kings’ will return to their 
own kingdoms, but the master conjures them to return whenever he wishes. 

In no. 40, the master turns to the east, scrapes both of the boy’s 
thumbnails, places one of the boy’s thumbs over the other, writes the name 
of the boy and the name Astaroth on the knife handle, gives the knife to the 
boy and has him hold it beneath his thumbs, anoints with olive oil the 
uppermost of the boy’s thumbnails, making the form of a cross on it with all 
devotion, then himself takes a seat, holding the boy between his knees, and 
instructing him to look carefully at his thumbnail. (The position of the boy 
suggests an intimacy that is surely erotic, even if subtly so.) The master 
conjures the demons to appear in the thumbnail in the form of the thief or 
thieves, ‘as they have promised’. He also prays to Christ, to manifest the 
truth make the boy report it. Again he conjures the demons to appear, and to 
make the boy’s nail grow large and bright. At the end of the experiment, the 
master says the prayer, ‘Protect, save, bless, [and] sanctify all the people by 
the sign of the Lord’s cross. Fend off afflictions of body and soul. Let no 
peril prevail against this sign. Amen. May Jesus Christ defend us by this 
sign of the cross. Amen.’ 

Experiments involving vessels 

Perhaps among the most ancient and widespread means for divination is 
gazing at the surface of a fluid in a bowl or other vessel. The materials for 
such operations would have been available virtually anywhere, even if 
suitable mirrors were not on hand. A letter to King Psammetichos, included 
in the Greek magical papyri, gives instructions for bowl divination: one 
should take a bronze bowl or saucer and fill it with water, then add green 
olive oil, recite an incantation over it, and ask questions of whatever god 
one wishes; the deity will reply, after which he can be dismissed with a 
powerful name of a hundred letters, a name which commands gods and 
daimones, causing the universe to tremble.- Elsewhere there are bowls or 
other vessels on which magical formulas have been inscribed, but these are 
usually intended for types of magic other than divination.- 

In two brief experiments from the Munich handbook, the reflecting 
surfaces that furnish information are vessels or basins. No. 22 involves 
tracing a circle on the ground with the point of a special knife, entering the 
circle with a virgin boy or girl, carving various sacred names on a vessel, 


well cleaned inside and out, and writing on the vessel with a feather from 
the left wing of a black hen, with accompanying prayers. The master 
conjures the child to divulge the information revealed regarding a thief or 
murderer, then he invokes God to grant this knowledge to the child. The 
child gazes intently into the vessel, and continues doing so until figures 
appear. In ‘The True Art of the Basin’ (no. 29), the master recites ten names 
into a boy’s ear, conjures spirits to appear in a basin and divulge 
information, writes three names on a slip of parchment or paper, and places 
it in the basin. Then he asks God with humble devotion to give the boy 
knowledge so that he can respond truly, and he asks Christ to illumine the 
boy’s mind. He conjures the demons to appear to the boy in a mirror or on 
the blade of a sword. When the demons appear, the boy tells their king to sit 
down, and has him send for a ram, a feature reminiscent of no. 27. Then 
follow various conjurations. The experiment terminates with an exchange 
between the young boy and the demon king, again in the manner of no. 27. 

These divinatory experiments are unusual in their emphasis on sitting: 
the master, the medium, any companions, and the spirits themselves are 
instructed or invited repeatedly to sit, whether on thrones, at table, on stools, 
or simply on the ground. It would perhaps be misleading to seek a single 
meaning in this posture; the spirits’ being enthroned in their capacity as 
kings can hardly have the same significance as the medium’s being seated 
on a stool. Yet this feature of the experiments is consonant with another 
peculiarity of this category which distinguishes it from the psychological 
and illusionist rituals: in these experiments the conjurations are intended 
specifically to bring about consultation between the magicians and the 
spirits, rather than their dialogue being a prelude to some further result, and 
thus the parties on both sides are in effect sitting down to do business. This 
is not to say that their being seated is necessary, but that it makes a kind of 
sense here that it would not make elsewhere. 

An experiment involving a bone 

For no. 28 the master anoints the right shoulder blade of a ram with olive oil 
and puts it beneath the handle of a knife. He holds a lighted candle and 
conjures six demons to appear in the reflective surface before a virginal boy 
(under twelve years of age) and answer questions. If the boy sees the 
shoulder blade grow larger and brighter, the master conjures the demons 



again to appear. When a spirit appears in the form of a black man, the 
master asks him questions through the mediation of the boy. The master can 
conjure the boy so that he has the power to see a spirit, but not the power to 
lie. The experiment closes with miscellaneous instructions: While making a 
circle, the master should say ‘Sator Arepo Tenet Opera Rotas’, then two 
prayers, one for aid in undertakings, the other for sending the Holy Spirit 
upon the boy to illumine his mind so that he can see and reveal truths. 
Names of God are given, to be inscribed on the shoulder blade. And to send 
the demons away, the master makes the sign of the cross over the shoulder 
blade and says, ‘Behold the cross of the Lord. Take flight, O hostile powers 
(Fugite partes aduerse ). The lion of the tribe of Juda, the stem of David, has 
conquered. Go in peace to the places from which you came.’ 

Johannes Hartlieb tells how the shoulder blades of various large animals 
are examined in the form of divination known as spatulamancy,- but does 
not speak of operations performed over these bones in the manner 
prescribed by the Munich handbook. 

Experiments involving visions in sleep 

The last two divinatory experiments in the handbook, both short and simple 
in form, differ from the preceding divinatory rites because they do not 
involve gazing into reflective surfaces, but rather the inducement of 
revelatory dream visions. The Egyptians had been famous for their dream 
interpretation, whether the dreams were induced or spontaneous, and the 
Greek magical papyri from Egypt contain instructions for obtaining a 
revelation in sleep: according to one passage, the person seeking the vision 
goes to bed in the presence of a lamp fuelled with sesame oil mixed with 
cinnabar, and recites a prescribed formula; to ensure that the revelation is 
not lost to oblivion, he must have a small tablet nearby to write it down. No. 
16 has the master write a series of sacred names within a double band on 
virgin parchment, plus specified names. Three times he conjures the names 
themselves, that they may send the angels Michael, Gabriel and Raphael to 
reveal whatever information he is seeking. The master then places this 
parchment beneath his right ear when he goes to sleep. 

No. 41, designed to discover hidden treasure, is exceptional for the extent 
to which it blends magic with pious devotion: 


To know where a treasure is hidden, first a person must make a general 
confession of all his sins, under a waxing moon, on a Sunday, when the 
Sun is in Leo, early in the morning. And when you first arise, sprinkle 
yourself with holy water, saying the antiphon, Asperges me, domine, 
ysopo, etc., in its entirety. Then go to a crucifix and say before it, 
Miserere mei, deus [Ps. 50 Vulg.], in its entirety, gazing constantly at the 
crucifix, with utter devotion. And when you say these things, then say 
most devoutly and with contrite heart, ‘O rabbi, rabbi, my king and my 
God, and Lord of lords, you who are creator of all things, hear the prayer 
which 1, a wretched and unworthy creature, make, and [be mindful?] of 
your redemption in this hour and always, and may my unworthy cry 
come unto Thee.’ 

When you have said this, go to your house and into your chamber, 
which should be thoroughly cleaned, and, facing east, say this prayer as 
devoutly as you can: ‘O gracious Orient ... strengthen my understanding 
in this work by the dominion of your kingdom, which is never lost. 
Guide and fear [?] me in this my supplication. And I pray you by your 
kings ... that on the following night Haram, a benign spirit, may come to 
me in my sleep and enkindle my heart and my mind, that 1 may know 
how to find a treasure, if there is any in these parts or elsewhere, and 
may he lead me and make a sign there, so that 1 may know it as true, and 
[I may know] the truth itself.... 1 call out and implore that you may deign 
to send me a spirit of truth this night in my sleep, that he may reveal to 
me a hidden treasure.’ Say this facing east, and on bended knees. Say this 
prayer three times. 

When you go to bed, say nine times, ‘Orient, Orient, Orient, 1 pray, 
beg, and ask, O most benign Orient, that you may fulfil my petition and 
desire to respect my entreaties.’ Then a spirit will come to you, who will 
not displease you, but will make you dream of a treasure, and will lead 
you directly to the place. 

The next morning, when you arise, give three portions of alms in 
honour of the great knowing King, and go out, accompanied or alone, to 
the place where there is treasure in your home [?], and take it. When you 
have the treasure, have three masses sung: the first in honour of the Holy 
Trinity, the second for the sins of the deceased, the third for the 
safeguarding of your life, etc. 



It is by no means surprising to find orthodox, traditional prayers used in the 
practice of magic, or for non-standard petitions to be referred to as prayers, 
or even for the magician to prepare himself by a regimen of confession and 
purification. The offering of alms and the subsequent celebration of three 
masses is perhaps less expected; in any case, what we have here is a mixture 
of magic and devotion that assumes no incompatibility between the two, and 
in the mind of the practitioner there presumably was no incongruity.- 

Possible Jewish sources 

Magical practices are often so widespread that it is impossible to trace 
specific patterns of transmission, and the divinatory rituals found in the 
Munich handbook are at least as widely diffused as any other magical 
techniques. Nevertheless, there is some reason to suppose that these 
divinatory practices show the influence of Jewish divination in particular. 
This should not be surprising, in the light of frequent suggestions that 
Christians learned or obtained their magic from Jews.- One might suspect 
that this theme merely reflects stereotypes of the reprobate Jew,- but there 
is nothing implausible about Christians seeking to amplify their own 
repertoire of magical practices by borrowing from those of a people 
antecedently categorized as having a reprobate subculture. The formulas of 
the Munich handbook, like those of the Greek magical papyri from 
antiquity, often imitate those of Judaism, as if in homage to a culture 
perceived as having superior magic. The centrality of the Tetragrammaton,- 
the occasional use of Hebrew letters, and the use of the pentacle of Solomon 
in Clm 849 and other necromantic texts are evident signs of Jewish 
influence, however indirect and distorted the transmission may have been. 
No. 42 gives ‘the great name Semiforas’ (meaning the Shem ham-Mforash ) 
as a series of Hebrew and pseudo-Hebrew words beginning ‘Saday, Hay, 
ReseT; the scribe seems uncomfortable with the material, and at one point 
leaves a blank space in his transcription of the name, but does recognize it 
as a Hebrew name for God, which he says was written on the forehead of 
Aaron the priest.- 

Samuel Daiches has edited and analysed a series of Jewish magical texts 
that resemble the divinatory practices of the Munich manuscript closely.- 
Of special interest are the procedures in three manuscripts from the 
collection of Theodore Gaster. Codex Gaster 315 tells how to conjure the 


‘princes of the thumb’ by tracing a circle in the earth with a black-handled 
knife and then placing a young boy in the circle, anointing the boy’s 
thumbnail and forehead with pure olive oil, and whispering a conjuration 
into his ear while he gazes at his nail. The conjuration reads, in part, T 
adjure you, princes of the nail ... that you should bring the king Minon in 
this nail, and the queen shall also come with him, and that his two servants 
shall come and that they shall bring there two lambs, one black and one 
white, and they shall slaughter them ... and that they shall bring there three 
glass cups ...’ When the king and queen appear in the boy’s nail, they 
should be invited to eat and drink, after which they will give all the 
information the operator desires.- Another ritual from the same manuscript, 
for conjuring ‘the princes of the hand’, requires invoking a series of names; 
if the boy sees nothing in his hand the master must repeat the invocation, 
then if necessary say, ‘1 adjure you, Ator, Sator, Somani, Ator’ (a garbled 
version of the SATOR-AREPO formula). If the boy sees a man dressed in 
black he must have him don white garments, and then he invites him to eat 
and drink.- Similar rituals are prescribed in Codices Gaster 443 and 1,000. 
They all require as a medium a young boy (seven years old in one ritual) or 
girl, or in some cases a pregnant woman, in which case Daiches assumes it 
is the innocence of the unborn child that facilitates the divination. 

The manuscripts Daiches uses are all late - from the sixteenth or 
seventeenth century, or, in the case of Codex Gaster 443, as late as 1775 - 
but Daiches argues for close parallels with much earlier Jewish and even 
Babylonian practice. One Babylonian ritual tablet of around 2000 BCE 
speaks of ‘the master of the nail of this finger’; the slaughter of the lambs, 
the use of three cups, the invitation of the spirits to eat and drink, and the 
assurance that they will answer questions truly all find parallels in 
Babylonian divinatory texts. Rashi in the eleventh century referred to ‘work 
of the demons’ called ‘princes of the thumb’ that involved use of a black- 
handled knife, a glass cup, and so forth. Further evidence for the continuity 
of such practices in medieval Judaism comes from the Sefer Hasidim and 
related texts, which report visions in which demons or the spirits of the dead 
were summoned to appear in dreams or on reflecting surfaces, often to 
identify thieves or to locate lost objects. Around the turn of the thirteenth 
century, Jacob of Marvege recorded a series of dreams in which he received 
answers to questions he had posed {she’elat halom).- None of this evidence 
proves that the rituals found in the modern manuscripts preserve in detail 


the formulas used in medieval magic. Yet it seems likely that the divinatory 
rituals of the Munich handbook can be traced to medieval Jewish precedent, 
and thus indirectly to Babylonian prototypes; this is in any event more likely 
than the reverse, that the Gaster manuscripts contain Jewish borrowing from 
Christian sources. 


An experiment for instruction 

The very first experiment in the Munich manuscript fits only loosely into 
the category of divination: it is intended for acquiring knowledge of all the 
liberal arts through the instruction of a demon. Because the first two folios 
of Clm 849 are missing, this experiment begins in medias res, yet even in 
truncated form the experiment is reasonably intelligible; in all likelihood 
there was either prefatory material or another experiment on folios 1 and 2, 
and only a small part of the present experiment has been lost. In the missing 
lines the magician is evidently instructed to take a piece of cloth and draw 
on it a ‘circle’, meaning a simple band made of two concentric circles, 
within which the names of various demons are to be inscribed. The 
markings on this cloth are to be made with the blood of a bird, perhaps a 
hoopoe, and evidently the magician is to use the heart of this bird as a 
writing instrument: at later points in the experiment reference is made to 
writing with ‘the aforementioned blood’ by means of a heart. 

