SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 16/39  |  CHARS: 359253-384014 of 925451
============================================================

the magician is evidently instructed to take a piece of cloth and draw 
on it a ‘circle’, meaning a simple band made of two concentric circles, 
within which the names of various demons are to be inscribed. The 
markings on this cloth are to be made with the blood of a bird, perhaps a 
hoopoe, and evidently the magician is to use the heart of this bird as a 
writing instrument: at later points in the experiment reference is made to 
writing with ‘the aforementioned blood’ by means of a heart. 

This experiment is built around four conjurations: the first, addressed to 
three “kings” among the demons, results in the initial presentation of a 
teacher to the magician; the second, again addressed to these kings, is for 
the return of the teacher and inception of lessons; the third, addressed to the 
same demons plus four others, is for the same effect; the fourth, addressed 
to the teacher himself, leads directly to his return and to the instruction. The 
magician commands the demons Apolin, Maraloth and Berith to send yet 
another demon as a teacher, or magister, a term used elsewhere in the 
manual for the magician himself. 

... toward the east. Then you must say: ‘Apolin, Maraloth, Berith, 1, so- 
and-so, exorcise and conjure you ... to send me a certain spirit who is 
expert in teaching of all the sciences, and may he be kindly, faithful, and 
pleasing to me, and teach every knowledge that 1 desire, coming in the 
form of a master, so that 1 may feel no sense of fear.... Likewise, 1 



conjure you ... that you three great kings and companions of mine may 
endeavour to send to me, your petitioner, one of your subordinates, to 
serve as master of all the sciences and arts, coming to me in a pleasant 
and splendid human form, and instruct me lovingly, so that within thirty 
days 1 may acquire this knowledge, and after 1 have received this 
knowledge 1 may give them licence to withdraw.’ And this must be said 
so many [=three?] times. 

When you have said this, put down the sword and wrap it in the 
aforesaid cloth, and, having made a bundle, lie down on it and sleep for a 
little while. After sleeping, rise and clothe yourself (for when the bundle 
has been made a man must undress and enter a chamber, placing this 
bundle beneath his head). You must know that when these conjurations 
have been said, sleep comes by divine power. In the sleep, three great 
kings [will] appear to you with countless servants, knights, and 
footsoldiers, among whom there will appear a certain master, whom the 
three kings will command. [You will see] him ready to come to you. For 
you will see the three kings, shining with wondrous beauty, who will 
speak to you in this sleep with one voice, saying, ‘Behold, we give you 
what you have many times requested.’ And they will say to the master, 
‘Let him be your student, and we command you to teach him every 
science or art that he wishes to hear. Instruct and educate him so that 
within thirty days he will be regarded among others as supreme in 
whatever science he wishes.’ And you will see him reply, ‘My lords, I 
shall most gladly do whatever you wish.’ When this has been said, the 
kings will depart and the master alone will remain, and will say to you, 
‘Arise, behold your master.’ When this has been said, you will be 
aroused; at once you will open your eyes, and you will see a master, 
excellently attired, who will say to you, ‘Give me the sword which you 
have beneath your head.’ You will say, ‘Behold your student, ready to do 
whatever you wish.’ But you must have a tablet, and must write down all 
that he tells you. 

First you must ask, ‘O master, what is your name?’ He [will] tell, and 
you must write it down. Second, from what order, and likewise write it 
down. When this has all been said, you must ask for the sword, and when 
you have it he will withdraw, saying, ‘Wait until I return.’ You will say 
nothing, but the master will leave and take the sword.- After his 
withdrawal, you must unwrap the cloth, as appears below. And you 


should write in this circle his name, as you have written it down, and you 
must write it with the aforementioned blood. When it is written, wrap up 
the cloth and hide it well. 

When all this has been done, you must dine on bread and pure water 
alone, and that day you must not exit your chamber. And when you have 
eaten, take the cloth and enter the circle facing Apolin. Say: ‘O King 
Apolin, great, powerful, and venerable, 1, your servant, believing and 
wholly trusting that you are strong and mighty, ask by your 
incomprehensible majesty that your servant and subject, so-and-so, my 
master, should come to me as quickly as he can, by your virtue and 
power, which is great and supremely great unto ages of ages. Amen.’ 
And you must speak likewise facing Maraloth, changing the name. And 
likewise facing Berich. When all this has been said, take some of the 
aforesaid blood and write your name in the middle of the circle with the 
aforesaid heart, as is shown below. Then write these names, as shown 
here, with this heart on the corners of the cloth. But if the blood of one 
bird is not enough, you may kill as many as you wish. 

When all this has been done, sit in the circle for the entire day, gazing 
at it, and saying nothing. When evening comes, wrap up the cloth, 
undress, and enter the chamber, placing it beneath your head. And as you 
lie down, say in a clear voice, ‘O Apolin, Maraloch, Berith, Sathan, 
Beliath, Belzebuc, [and] Lucifer, 1 implore you to command the master - 
here naming his name - to come to me tomorrow before sunrise and 
teach me thus-and-such science, without any error ... ’ 

Beware and take caution not to make the sign ^ of the cross, on 
account of the great danger in sleeping. You should know that you will 
see the master speak with you throughout the night, asking you which 
science you wish to learn. You should reply, ‘Thus-and-such’, so that, as 
said, you may speak with him throughout the night. If you awake during 
that night, rise and light a candle, and take the cloth and unwrap it, and 
sit on it - that is to say, in the circle, where your name is written on the 
spot ordained for you - and call on the name of your master, saying, ‘O 
so-and-so, of thus-and-such an order, given to me by your greater kings 
as a master, I beseech you to come in a kindly form and teach me thus- 
and-such a science, in which I may become more expert than all mortals, 
learning it with great joy, without any effort, and with no tedium....’ 

When you have said this, looking toward the east you will see the 



master come with many students, and you will ask him to command that 
they all depart, and at once they will withdraw. Then the master will say, 
‘Which science do you wish to hear?’ You will say, ‘This-and-such’, and 
then you will begin. 

Bear in mind that you will learn all that he tells you and commit it to 
memory, and within thirty days you will acquire every science that you 
wish to have. 

And when you wish him to leave the chamber, fold and hide the cloth, 
and at once he will withdraw. And when you wish him to come, open the 
cloth, and at once he will appear there, continuing the lessons. After 
thirty days, having become well learned in science, have him give your 
sword to you, and then tell him to go, and he will withdraw in peace. You 
must repeat what you have said when you invoke him to gain knowledge 
of another science, and he will proclaim himself ready to oblige your 
will. 

This is the end of the chapter on [gaining] knowledge. 

The circle required for this first experiment is a single band inscribed 
within a square. Inscribed in and around the band are the names of seven 
spirits and the four cardinal directions. ‘The name of the master, of such- 
and-such an order’ and ‘The name of the student’ are marked in the centre. 

This experiment contains one incidental feature of some interest: the 
sword, which the demonic teacher claims at the beginning of the lessons but 
relinquishes to the magician at the end of the month when instruction is 
over, may be intended as a kind of sacrifice, albeit a temporary one. It 
serves, at any rate, to symbolize the relationship between the magician and 
the demon that exists throughout the thirty days of instruction: although the 
magician (as the source and ultimate owner of the sword) has conjured the 
demon and has authority to command his presence, the demon (as 
temporary keeper of the sword) exercises the authority over his pupil that 
comes from his possession of superior knowledge. It is only when the 
demon has imparted knowledge of all the liberal arts that the magician has 
become, to that extent, his equal and thus regains the sword. 

One might suppose that the magician conceives the sword further as a 
symbol for the power brought by his newly gained knowledge, but the 
manuscript gives little indication of a coherent and consistent quest for 
power, least of all in the political sphere. It is true that the writer claims to 



have connections at court: in one experiment he reminds the reader, ‘You 
have often seen me carry out this work at your court. ’ Elsewhere he tells of 
a trick that he played on an emperor and his courtiers. Even if we assume 
that this is not all pretence, however, the manual gives only meagre hints of 
specifically courtly interests. Only one experiment is designed to gain the 
favour of a potentate. Experiments to cause madness or to turn friends into 
enemies could be used at court, but could just as well be employed 
elsewhere. On the whole the manual is remarkably devoid of specifically 
political concern: there is little sense that the writer is intent on building or 
destroying kingdoms, nor does he display the combination of magical lore 
and practical engineering found in the real-life courtier Conrad Kyeser.- His 
procedures for divination seem to focus on personal rather than political 
matters. Some of the illusionist experiments bespeak the fanciful attitude 
toward magic often found in courtly romance: an illusory banquet is 
intended as an entertaining spectacle. The writer is perhaps here manifesting 
a distant fascination with courtly culture rather than a direct involvement in 
the life of any court. Any common necromancer, after all, might well 
fantasize about being called into the emperor’s service and serving as 
Michael Scot was supposed to have served Frederick 11.- 

One might seek precedent here too in Jewish magic designed to foster 
learning. Formulas occur in various early Jewish mystical texts for mastery 
of the Torah. The assumption is that angels have opposed God’s bestowal of 
the Torah upon humankind, and that this opposition accounts for students’ 
failure to memorize the sacred text. The solution is to adjure the appropriate 
spirits, particularly the ‘Prince of the Torah’ (sar ha-tor ah), by the power of 
the sacred names; the specific purpose of such adjuration is to master and 
memorize the Torah.- More immediate precedent, however, may be found 
in the later medieval magic of the so-called ars notoria, which uses prayers 
and invocation of angels to gain mastery of the liberal and mechanical arts.- 
Although the ars notoria did not call upon demonic aid, and ostensibly 
revolved around the recitation of devotions to the Virgin and to unfallen 
angels, its techniques were untraditional and superstitious, and an 
unsympathetic observer might pardonably have categorized it with this first 
experiment in the Munich handbook. 

It may also be instructive to compare the magic of this experiment with 
that narrated in a story told by Caesarius of Heisterbach, in the early 
thirteenth century, ‘concerning a schoolboy who made homage to the devil 


to have verses composed’: 

In the church of Saint Simeon in the diocese of Trier there was a little 
schoolboy. One day his master gave him a subject on which he was to 
compose verses, but he was unable to do so, and sat about disconsolate. 
The Devil appeared to him in human form as he sat by himself, and said 
to him, ‘Why are you so unhappy, little boy, and why are you sitting 
there looking so sad?’ The boy replied, ‘I’m afraid of my master, because 
I cannot compose any verses on the subject he has given me.’ The Devil 
said, ‘If you pay homage to me, I will compose the verses for you.’ The 
boy was unaware that he was dealing with the Devil, the enemy of all, 
who was bent on mischief, so he replied, ‘O yes, sir! I am ready to do 
anything you command, as long as I can have the verses and not get 
beaten! ’ For he did not know who it was. He stretched out his hand to the 
Devil, paying homage to him. At once he received the verses, written on 
tablets, and then he no longer beheld their writer. When he gave them to 
his master at the appropriate time, the latter was amazed at the excellence 
of the verses, and feared that the knowledge he found in them was 
supernatural [divinam] and not that of a human. He said, ‘Tell me, who 
wrote these verses for you?’ The boy said, ‘I did, master.’ But the master, 
not believing, repeated his interrogation of the lad many times over, until 
the boy confessed everything he had done, from beginning to end. Then 
the master said, ‘My boy, that versifier was an evil one, the Devil 
himself.’ Then he added, ‘My dear child, are you sorry that you paid 
homage to that seducer?’ The boy replied, ‘O yes, master.’ The master 
said, ‘Now renounce the Devil and his homage, and all his pomps and all 
his works.’ And he did so. Then the master cut off the sleeves of his 
surplice and offered them to the Devil, saying, ‘These sleeves are yours, 
O seducer of men, but you will possess nothing more of this creature of 
God!’ At once the sleeves were snatched away with a thunderbolt in the 
sight of all, while the boy’s body remained unharmed. All this was told 
me by a prior from the church of Trier. - 

The schoolboy’s deed is both more innocent and more guilty than the 
necromancer of the Munich handbook: it is more innocent because he is 
unaware that the source of his verses is an evil spirit, and also because he 
does not conjure the spirit but merely accepts his offer, yet in itself his 


action is more profoundly guilty because he makes homage to the demon. 
Joseph Hansen sees the concept of homage to a demon as a high medieval 
innovation inspired by the obvious feudal analogue, the vassal’s homage to 
his lord.- It seems to be only in orthodox literature condemning magic, 
however, that those who profit from the demons are seen as making such 
homage, or that sacrifices to the spirits are perceived as involving the same 
worship that would be implied by sacrifice offered to God. The magicians 
themselves, as in the Munich handbook, typically perceive any sacrifice as 
merely a quid pro quo. Oddly, the lad’s schoolmaster recognizes that the 
demon has some legitimate claim on the boy as a result of the transaction, 
and offers the spirit the sleeves of the pupil’s surplice ( superpellicii ) as his 
due, even after the boy repeats his baptismal renunciation of Satan’s works 
and pomps. The most basic difference between the two cases, in any event, 
is that Caesarius’s schoolboy, unlike the Munich magician, receives no new 
knowledge: he has polished verses handed to him but does not himself 
become an accomplished versifier. The quest of knowledge through magical 
means seems to be a theme more deeply embedded in Jewish sources, and in 
the Solomonic literature related to those sources. 


Notes 

1 M.R. James, ‘Twelve medieval ghost-stories’, English Historical Review, 37 (1922), 420f. 

2 Ambo simul euanuerunt ab oculis meis et amplius non video eos, et nescio sine dubio vbi sunt. 

3 See the analogues in Caesarius of Heisterbach, The Dialogue on Miracles, trans. H. von E. Scott 
and C.C. Swinton Bland, 1 (London: Routledge, 1929), 112-14. Barbara Newman has found parallels 
in several thirteenth- and fourteenth-century collections of exempla. 

4 John of Salisbury, Frivolities of Courtiers and Footprints of Philosophers, ii.28, trans. Joseph B. 
Pike (London: Oxford University Press, 1938), 146-7. 

5 The Commonplace Book of Robert Revnes of Acle: An Edition of Tanner MS 407, ed. Cameron 
Louis (New York: Garland, 1980), 169f.; C.L.S. Linnell, ed., ‘The commonplace book of Robert 
Reynys of Acle’, Norfolk Archaeology, 32 (1958-61), 114 (Linnell’s edition of the text is badly 
flawed). 

6 For the following see generally Benjamin Goldberg, The Mirror and Man (Charlottesville: 
University Press of Virginia, 1985), 3-25 (esp. 8-19), and Henry C. Bolton, ‘A modem oracle and its 
prototypes’, Journal of American Folklore, 6 (1893), 25-37. For early instances see W.R. Halliday, 
Greek Divination: A Study of Its Methods and Principles (London: Macmillan, 1919), 145-62 (which 
gives numerous parallels from various cultures) and A. Bouch-Leclercq, Histoire de la divination 
dans I’Antiquite, 1 (Paris: Leroux, 1879), 176-88. 

7 Siegfried Wenzel, ed. and trans., Fasciculus morum: A Fourteenth-Century Preacher’s 
Handbook, v. 30 (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1989), 578-9. 

8 George L. Kittredge, Witchcraft in Old and New England (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 


Press, 1929), 185. 

9 See Peter J. French, John Dee: The World of an Elizabethan Magus (London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul, 1972). 

10 Domenico Comparetti, Vergil in the Middle Ages, trans. E.F.M. Benecke (London: Swan 
Sonnenschein, 1895), 303-5, citing the Romans des Sept Sages, Cleomades, and the Renart 
contrefait. For parallels, see ibid., p. 304, n. 9. 

U Charles Plummer, ed., Vitae sanctorum Hiberniae, 1 (Oxford: Clarendon, 1910), 150: in 
speculo enim diuinitatis omnia futura sibipresentia erant. 

12 Johann Hartlieb, Das Buch aller verbotenen Kiinste, des Aberglaubens und der Zauberei, ed. 
and trans. Falk Eisermann and Eckhard Graf (Ahlerstedt: Param, 1989), chs 56, 83-84, 86, 88-90. 

j_3 Ibn Khaldun, The Muqaddimah: An Introduction to History, i. 194, trans. Franz Rosenthal, 2nd 
edn, vol. 1 (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1967), 216-17; Bolton, ‘A modern oracle’, 37. 

14 Reading intra for infra. 

15 Petrus Garsia, In determinationes magistrates contra conclusiones apologales Ioannis Pici 
Mirandulani Concordie Comitis proemium (Rome: Eucharius Silber, 1489), sig. k iv verso through k 
v recto (the discussion continues through 1 ij recto); see Lynn Thorndike, History of Magic and 
Experimental Science, 4 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1934), 497-507. 

16 Thorndike, History of Magic and Experimental Science, 3 (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1934), 430. 

17 Registrum Radulphi Baldock, ed. Fowler (Canterbury and York Series, 7), vol. 1, 144f.; 
Kittredge, Witchcraft, 187. 

18 Paris, Les grandes chroniques, vol. 5, 269-72; Recueil des historiens, vol. 20, 633f., 710-12; 
G.G. Coulton, trans., Life in the Middle Ages, 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1928), 160— 
62. Willelmi capellani in Brederode postea monachi et procuratoris Egmondensis chronicon, ed. C. 
Pijnacker Hordijk (Amsterdam: Muller, 1904), 127-30. 

19 Kittredge, Witchcraft, 80, 187, from David Wilkins, ed., Concilia Magnae Britanniae et 
Hiberniae, 3 (London, 1737), 393f. 

20 Kittredge, Witchcraft, 187, from A. Hamilton Thompson, ed., Visitations of Religious Houses 
in the Diocese of Lincoln (London: Canterbury and York Society, 1915—), 208-13. 

21 Reports of the Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts, 8 (London: Eyre & 
Spottiswoode, 1881), 265; William Hale Hale, A Series of Precedents and Proceedings in Criminal 
Causes from 1475 to 1640, Extracted from Act Books of Ecclesiastical Courts in the Diocese of 
London, Illustrative of the Discipline of the Church of England (London: Rivington, 1847); 1 Of.; C. 
Trice Martin, ‘Clerical life in the fifteenth century, as illustrated by proceedings of the Court of 
Chancery’, Archaeologia, 60 (=ser. 2, vol. 10) (1907), 371 f., 377; Kittredge, Witchcraft, 188, 195f 

22 The demons’ capacity for knowledge and foreknowledge is discussed in the influential work of 
Saint Augustine, ‘The divination of demons’, in Roy J. Deferrari, ed., Saint Augustine: Treatises on 
Marriage and Other Subjects (New York: Fathers of the Church, 1955), 415-40. 

23 Peter Brown, The Cult of the Saints: Its Rise and Function in Latin Christianity (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1981), 106-13, esp. 109. Brown quotes Victricius of Rouen on the 
effects of exorcism: ‘A torturer bends over the unclean spirit, but is not seen. There are no chains here 
now, yet the being who suffers is bound. God’s anger has other hooks to tear the flesh and other racks 
to stretch invisible limbs.’ The theme is one which Barbara Newman will address in forthcoming 
research on thirteenth-century accounts of exorcism. 

24 Fol. 156r. 


25 Translation from G.G. Coulton, ed. and trans., Life in the Middle Ages, new edn, 1 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1967), no. 46, pp. 85f. 

26 Translation from C. Trice Martin, ‘Clerical life in the fifteenth century, as illustrated by 
proceedings of the Court of Chancery’, Archaeologia, 60 (=ser. 2, vol. 10) (1907), 377f.; see 
Kittredge, Witchcraft, 188. 

27 Augustus Jessopp, Random Roaming and Other Papers, 2nd edn (London, Unwin, 1894), 109— 
12. Cf. Kittredge, Witchcraft, 94, 206. 

28 Kittredge, Witchcraft, 195. 

29 Mary of Nijmeghen, attributed to Anna Bijns, in Eric Colledge, trans., Medieval Netherlands 
Religious Literature (New York: London House & Maxwell, 1965), 208; repr. in Elizabeth Alvilda 
Petroff, ed., Medieval Women s Visionary Literature (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986), 364. 

30 Nos 19, 24, 25, 27, 29, 30, 41 (not used); nos 18, 20, 23, 33, 38, 39, 40, 22, 28, 16 (not highly 
significant). 

31 For examples of the use of a boy medium in antiquity, see Hans Dieter Betz, ed., The Greek 
Magical Papyri in Translation, Including the Demotic Spells, 1 (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1986), PGM IV.88,1.42, VII.540, V.370, IV.850, V.l and VII.348. 

32 No. 28 specifies that the boy should be under twelve. See also Rawlinson MS D 252, fols 
109r-109v. 

33 No. 22 in the Munich handbook; Rawlinson MS D 252, fol. 114v; Johann Hartlieb, DasBuch 
aller verbotenen Kiinste, ch. 84. 

34 Nicholas Orme, ‘Children and the Church in medieval England’, Journal of Ecclesiastical 
History, 45 (1994), 580f. 

35 Chs 86, 88, 94. 

36 On these possibilities see James W. Fernandez, ‘Reflections on looking into mirrors’, 
Semiotica, 30 (1980), 27-39. 

37 The writer’s B and L might readily be confused, especially in the lower case; see, for example, 
the references to Belial in no. 12. One might syppose that Bylet is simply an alternative spelling for 
Lilit, but there is in fact a spirit known as Beleth, Bileth, Bilet or Byleth, on whom see Gustav 
Davidson, A Dictionaiy of Angels, Including the Fallen Angels (New York: Free Press, 1967), 73. 

38 Lynn Thorndike, Michael Scot (London: Nelson, 1965), 120. 

39 Ch. 89. 

40 Rawl. 8v, 15 lv. 

44 Chs 83-84. 

42 In no. 41 he writes ‘Tetragrammaton’ (probably that word, though possibly the four letters for 
which it stands) beneath the boy’s feet, then he puts two stones on top of this inscribed word, lest the 
boy touch the sacred name with his feet. 

43 Betz, The Greek Magical Papyri, 1, pp. 40-43 (PGM IV. 154-285). 

44 Joseph Naveh and Shaul Shaked, Amulets and Magic Bowls: Aramaic Incantations of Late 
Antiquity (Jerusalem: Magnes Press, Hebrew University; Leiden: Brill, 1985); see Michael Ofori 
Mankata, Hohore — the Magic Bowl: A Ghanaian Folk Tale (Accra: Afram, 1995). 

45 Chs 115-31. See also Charles Burnett, Magic and Divination in the Middle Ages: Texts 

and Techniques in the Islamic and Christian Worlds (Aldershot: Variorum, 1996), XII-XV. 

46 The dream oracle of Besas, in Betz, Greek Magical Papyri, 1, pp. 122-23 (PGM 

VII.222-49). On Egyptian dream interpretation see Joseph Kaster, trans. and ed., The Wings of 


the Falcon (New York, 1968), 153-8. 

47 Bodleian Library, MS e Mus. 219, contains a miscellany of magical experiments, among which 
are similarly pious recommendations on fol. 187v: to recover a lost object, recall the cross of Christ 
(which was found) and give bread to four paupers; to avert affliction, recall the blows of Christ; for 
release from captivity, recall that of Christ; to survive a duel, fast, give as much as possible in alms, 
have three masses sung (those for the finding of the Holy Cross, the exaltation of the Holy Cross, and 
the Ascension), and wash the hands and feet of three paupers (or five, seven or thirteen). 

