SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 12/39  |  CHARS: 263324-288034 of 925451
============================================================

ion of the image to be 
blown about freely in the air is reminiscent of a type of aeromancy catalogued by 
Johannes Hartlieb, involving the suspension of a wax image or atzman, left to 
blow in the wind so that the person in whose name it is prepared will thereby be 
afflicted.- The blood of a dove must be used here - and a dove must be offered 
as sacrifice in the amatory experiment from the Liber de angelis given above - 
presumably because the dove is traditionally associated with Venus .- 

The experiment contains an elaborate contingency procedure, used to fetch 
the woman, which differs markedly from the original sympathetic magic. The 
woman’s image is still used: the experimenter wears it around his neck, although 
it is invisible to her; as she leaves the circle he touches her with it, and from then 
on she will love only him; when she departs, he should take it off and keep it 
safe in a vessel. For immediate purposes at hand, however, the image becomes 
less significant and the role of the demons becomes proportionally greater. It is 
the demons who fetch the woman in response to a conjuration, and it is a demon 
who takes the woman’s place and prevents others from noting her absence. 
When the magician orders one of the spirits to go and take the woman’s place 
and assume her form while she is absent, we have an element of illusionist 
magic embedded in an experiment designed mainly for psychological effect. 
Both the problem and the solution are obvious enough that it is not surprising to 
find parallels in other cultures. Thus, Krishna is said to have used his powers of 
illusion ( ma-ya -) to fashion replicas of his female devotees (the gopi-s ), so that 
when they went for trysts with him their doubles could lie beside their 
husbands.- The contingency procedure in the Munich experiment differs from 
the original formula also in its use of a circle, which is simple in form but 
important in its effects, serving both as a location for the conjuration and as a 
place for rendezvous with the woman. 

The experiment is referred to as a kind of game or spectacle, a ludus, and any 



companions present are to serve merely as spectators, suggesting that the 
necromancer’s initial ritual may have the character of a performance, contrasting 
sharply with the privacy of the tryst itself, the sexual games that follow, which 
not even the spirits may witness. That something more serious than a game is 
involved is suggested by the reference to the woman as filocapta , bound by love, 
a condition which the Malleus maleficarum speaks of as ‘the best known and 
most general form of witchcraft’. - 


An erotic experiment involving image magic 

For the next experiment in this category (no. 12) the manuscript once again 
proceeds directly to the instructions, without any introductory heading. The 
master must first obtain hairs from the woman he wishes to seduce,- plus other 
objects. Again he goes out with companions in the initial stage of the ritual itself. 
In contrast to the elaborate preparations, the heart of the ceremony is relatively 
simple, involving two sympathetic stages and a single conjuration. 

Take virgin wax, rendered virginal by art [ceram virgineam, arte 
virginizatam ], and do this on a Thursday or Sunday, at the hour of Venus or 
the hour of Jove; and from this wax make an image over burning coals placed 
in a pot, without smoke. And the master should have some of the hairs of the 
woman for whom he wishes to act, and three bristles of red hair, and you 
should have with you a knife with a white handle made for this purpose.- 
And go to the place where a craftsman makes needles, and have the same 
craftsman make them, from the hour of the Sun until the hour of Saturn. Then 
the master should take two faithful companions and go to a fruit-bearing tree, 
and the master should make a circle. And the master should begin this 
operation, making an image of the woman for whom you perform it, 
murmuring constantly in your heart, ‘Thou, Belial, and thou Astaroth, and 
thou, Paymon, be my helpers in this undertaking.’ Likewise, you should 
murmur the words, T, N., form this image for the love of so-and-so, that it 
may accomplish that for which it is made. And may thou, Belial, principal 
prince, be my helper in this undertaking.’ Then the master should make the 
image of this wax, beginning at the hour of Jove, and proceeding until the 
hour of Saturn. And when the image has thus been made, the master should 
have nine needles made by an experienced craftsman, who should be bathed 
and dressed in sparkling clean [nitidis] garments when he makes them; he 


should make the needles from the hour of the Sun until the hour of Saturn. 
Then the master should fix the needles in the image, placing one in the head, 
another in the right shoulder, the third in the left, the fourth where people are 
accustomed to locate the heart, saying, ‘Just as this needle is fixed in the heart 
of this image, so may the love of N. be fixed to the love of N., so that she 
cannot sleep, wake, lie down, sleep, [or] walk until she burns with love of 
me.’ He should fix the fifth in the navel, the sixth in the thigh, the seventh in 
the right side, the eighth in the left, the ninth in the anus. When the image has 
thus been made, you should baptize [ christianizes ] it, giving it the name [of 
the woman] for whom you perform the operation, immersing it three times 
and saying, ‘How shall it be called?’, with the response, ‘N.’ And you should 
say, T baptize thee, N., in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the 
Holy Spirit. Amen.’ And then place the image in a new and clean cloth, 
leaving it aside from the hour of the Sun until the hour of Mars. Then make 
this conjuration under the fruit-bearing tree, with the burning coals; turning 
toward the east, say, ‘O so-and-so, N., 1 conjure your head, your hair, your 
eyes, your ears [etc.]. O N., 1 conjure your entire substance, that you may not 
sleep or sit or lie down or perform any work of craft until you have satisfied 
my libidinous desire. 1 conjure you by the Father and the Son and the Holy 
Spirit ... 1 conjure you and exorcize you and command you, that as the deer 
yearns for a fountain of water [Ps. 41:2 Vulg.], so you, N., should desire my 
love. And as the raven desires the cadavers of dead men, so should you desire 
me. And as this wax melts before the face of the fire, so should N. [melt in] 
desire for my love, so that she cannot, etc.’ 

The signs [to be sought in] the woman are these: solitude, dizziness 
[inuolucio] of the head, lamenting, sighing, beating [of the breast], 
wakefulness, [and] wailing. Then the master or the one who is taking action 
[viz., for whom it is performed?] should go to her, and if he sees her standing 
or sitting alone, then the master should continue the conjuration unto the fifth 
day. And if she is anywhere in the countryside, she will be consumed;- but if 
she is in a town or passing through another city, the master should perform 
the conjuration until she can come. 

And in this all the Spanish, Arabic, Hebrew, Chaldaean, Greek and Latin 
astrological necromancers [ nigromantici omnes astroloyci ] are in accord. And 
this experiment was taken [from the book] On the Secret Arts of the 
Imaginary Art, [from the book] On the Flowers of All Experiments , etc. 


In its general form this experiment bears a resemblance to a procedure well 
known in antiquity and described in a Greek magical papyrus: to obtain a 
woman, one makes wax or clay figures, one an armed and threatening man with 
sword in hand, the other a kneeling woman with hands behind her back. One 
then writes inscriptions on each member of her body, then pierces each with 
copper needles, thirteen in all, while saying, ‘I am piercing your brain, N.’, and 
so forth. Then one inscribes a lead sheet, affixes it with thread knotted 365 times, 
and places the ensemble beside the tomb of a person who has died a violent or 
untimely death. One version adds a further spell, which reads in part, ‘Let her be 
in love with me, N.... Let her not ... do anything with another man for pleasure, 
just with me alone, N., so that she, N., be unable to drink or eat, that she not be 
contented, not be strong, not have pleace of mind, that she, N., not find sleep 
without me ... and do not allow her, N., to accept for pleasure the attempt of 
another man, not even that of her own husband, just that of mine, N. Instead, 
drag her, N., by the hair, by the heart, by her soul, to me, N., at every hour of 
life, day and night, until she comes to me, N., and may she, N., remain 
inseparable from me.’ There is also archeological evidence for such procedures; 
for example, one Egyptian statue of a naked woman, pierced with thirteen 
needles, was discovered in a clay pot and is now in the Musee du Louvre.- This 
does not mean there are specific connections between texts of late antiquity and 
the prescriptions of the Munich handbook; rather the Munich compilation 
supports its conjurations with a variety of techniques, some of which are widely 
diffused and of considerable antiquity. 

Among the many further parallels to this experiment is a fifteenth-century 
version given in a mixture of Hebrew and Yiddish. The magician is told to make 
a female image of virgin wax, showing the sexual organs clearly delineated, and 
resembling the woman to be enchanted. On both the breast and the back he 
should write ‘N., daughter of N. [father] and N., daughter of N. [mother].’ He 
must recite the words, ‘May it be Thy will, O Lord, that N. daughter of N. burn 
with a mighty passion for me.’ Then buries the figure for a time, then washes it 
in the name of Michael, in that of Gabriel, and in that of Raphael, places it in 
urine, then dries it off. The image being thus prepared, the magician may use it 
when he wishes to cause the woman pain, by piercing a needle into whatever 
part of her body he wishes to afflict, presumably as a way of bending her to his 
will, very much in keeping with the violent and coercive tendencies generally 
found in such magic. - 

It is entirely possible that the piercing with needles was itself meant or taken 


to have direct sexual significance,- but more fundamentally it was a kind of 
magical acupuncture intended to cause suffering that could only be alleviated 
through sexual compliance. The piercing with needles is thus no different in 
principle from that in image magic intended to work bodily harm or death, 
although here the affliction could be relieved through submission. It is not that 
the magician brings about bodily pain that is extrinsically related to the erotic 
goal and can be cured by compliance, nor is it the case that the magic arouses 
pleasurable feelings of passion. Rather, the sexual passion aroused by the ritual 
is itself a kind of suffering for which the woman must obtain relief. The victim 
of magic cannot sleep, sit down, lie down, or pursue any activity until she 
relents, because she is compelled to share in the obsessive passion of her 
pursuer.- Her state is almost a parody of the mystic’s absorption in the Beloved, 
of Mechthild of Magdeburg’s mystical love-sickness: ‘I cannot rest, I burn 
without respite in Thy flaming love.’- But, as Richard of Saint-Victor insisted, 
such obsession was as debasing in human relations as it was elevating in 
relations with God; that it should be magically induced by experiments such as 
those in the Munich handbook is a possibility Richard may never have 
entertained.- 


Erotic experiments involving rituals with bones 

Two experiments (nos 13 and 35) involve inscribing letters and names on bones 
and then subjecting the bones to fire. The first is designed primarily to constrain 
a woman’s or man’s will, presumably again with erotic intent (the relevant 
sections are indicated below with [A]), although the experiment may be adapted 
for constraining a beast [B] or a spirit [C] as well. 

By this experiment a person, woman, man, spirit, [or] beast of any condition 
is constrained. 

These names must be written in this manner on a shoulderblade. 

When all this is finished, choose which [variant] you want. If you wish to 
constrain any spirit, write his name on the shoulderblade between B and E, 
and in the name which is Bel. If you wish to constrain any man, write his 
name between L and A. And if you wish to constrain any beast, write its 
name between A and N, and its colour. For spirits and for men and for 
women, this is to be done at the same hour in which the shoulderblade has 
been prepared, and it is necessary at the outset to seek out wood from a white 


thorn or wood floating on water, and make fire with it, and collect coals and 
place them in a new pot, and gradually place the shoulderblade on them, and 
gradually increase the fire, until the shoulderblade becomes hot. 

And then invoke the aforesaid spirits, and say this conjuration: ‘Asyel, 
Castiel, Lamisniel, Rabam, Erlain, [and] Belam, I command you’ - [Al] If 
[the operation is] for a man or a woman whom you wish to arouse to love for 
you, say, ‘that you should at once, etc.’, as given below. [B] If [it is] for a 
spirit, name that spirit whom you wish, that he may come to you openly, 
humbly, with comely visage, and gentle speech, saying, ‘I conjure you, Asyel, 
etc., that you should make spirit N., who has power over all that I wish to ask 
of him, come to me openly, humbly, with gentle speech, in the form that I 
have specified - that is, of a comely soldier - to carry out all that I wish to 
command him.’ [A2] And if you wish to do this for a man or a woman, first 
make known to him where you can be found, for he [or she] will go mad with 
fury on not being able to find you. [C] If [it is] for a beast, [say,] ‘I conjure 
the aforesaid spirits that they should constrain this beast’ which you wish, that 
it may be unable to depart from the place in which it is until you wish. 

The experiment concludes with the conjuration used to constrain a man or 
woman: 

‘Asyel, Castiel, Lamsiyel, Rabam, Erlain, Elam, Belam, I conjure you by the 
true God ...; likewise, I conjure you by the Father and the Son and the Holy 
Spirit ..., and by this conjuration I command you to seduce the heart and 
mind of N. to love me, immediately and swiftly and at once and without 
delay. And just as this shoulderblade grows hot and burns, so may you cause 
him or her, N., to burn and grow hot with the fire of love for me, and in such 
a way that he [or she] may not be able to rest until completing my will. In the 
name which is Bel, etc.’ 

The figure depicted is in the shape of a shield, representing the shoulderblade, 
divided into sixteen horizontal bands, with one vertical band down the centre. 
Horizontal bands bear the names Asyel, Castyel, Lamsiyel, Rabam, Erlain, Olam 
and Belam. In the vertical band are the letters A-B-E-L-A-N. Across the 
intersection of the vertical band and the twelfth horizontal band Leo is written. 
To the side is a note: ‘Likewise note that this shoulderblade should be from an 
ass, a hare, a goose or a capon, according to its diverse [uses].’ 

The second of these experiments is somewhat simpler, and more 



unambiguously erotic. The magician compels a woman to passionate love by 
writing the names of the ‘infernal spirits’ Bel and Ebal on a rib, and in between 
his own name and that of the woman he wishes to seduce. Then he burns the rib, 
and when it is hot he should conjure Bel and Ebal not to rest until they cause the 
woman’s heart to burn, so that she cannot sleep, wake or do anything else until 
she fulfils his desire. Again, therefore, we find the emphasis on compelling the 
woman’s compliance through erotic affliction, aroused through means that are 
straightforwardly violent both on the symbolic plane and in their bodily and 
psychic effect. 

In general, then, these psychological experiments are the most manipulative 
and abusive materials in the necromancer’s handbook, and they are quite 
unabashedly so. The formulas give no hint of a guilty conscience, and they show 
no awareness of the incongruity involved in appealing to the power of the sacred 
for the ends here sought. With no evident sense of irony, the writer can 
recommend formulas such as, ‘I conjure you demons inscribed in this circle, to 
whom is given the power and capacity to seduce and bind in the love of men, by 
the virtue and power of the divine majesty ... ’ Even merely to read the illusionist 
experiments might be entertaining, and the divinatory ones might be perceived 
as useful means for gaining true knowledge, but the rituals for psychological 
magic could claim little by way of redeeming social importance, and thus they 
help to clarify the aversion to magic found in most of late medieval society. Yet 
these rites are interesting, in large part because of the way they fuse relatively 
simple and largely perennial conceptions of image magic with the formulas of 
Latin conjuration or exorcism derived more specifically from clerical culture. 
Guichard of Troyes and Eleanor Cobham were accused of employing both 
learned male magicians and popular female ones, but the psychological rites of 
the Munich handbook represent with particular clarity the mingling of magical 
traditions and ritual forms. 


Notes 

1 See Robert Mathiesen, ‘Magic in Slavia Orthodoxa: the written tradition’, in Henry Maguire, ed., 
Byzantine Magic (Washington: Dumbarton Oaks, 1995), 174-6. 

2 Domenico Mammoli, The Record of the Trial and Condemnation of a Witch, Matteuccia di Francesco, 
at Todi, 20 March 1428 (Rome: Res Tudertinse, 1972), trans. (with slight adaptation), pp. 28-MO. 

3 John G. Gager, Curse Tablets and Binding Spells from the Ancient World (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1992), 21. 

4 Picatrix: The Latin Version of the Ghayat Al-Hakim, ed. David Pingree (London: Warburg Institute, 
1986), and ‘Thabit ibn Qurra’s De imaginibus', in Francis J. Carmody, The Astronomical Works of Thabit b. 


Qurra (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1960), 180-97. 

5 Cambridge University Library, MS Dd.xi.45, fols 134v-139; Juris G. Lidaka spoke about this 
manuscript and gave a transcription of the text at the International Congress on Medieval Studies at 
Kalamazoo, Michigan, 4 May 1995. The manuscript is associated with ‘Bokenham’, but its connection with 
Osbem Bokenham or any other individual is unclear. 

6 Abel Rigault, Le proces de Guichard eveque de Troyes, 1308-1313 (Paris, 1896). Cf. Guillaume 
Mollat, ‘Guichard de Troyes et les revelations de la sorciere de Bourdenay’, Moyen Age, 21 (ser. 2, 12) 
(1908), 310-14; Conrad Eubel, ‘Vom Zaubereiunwesen anfangs des 14. Jahrhunderts (mit urkundlichen 
Beilagen)’, Historisches Jahrbuch der Gorres-Gesellschaft, 18 (1897). 

7 George Lyman Kittredge, Witchcraft in Old and New England (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1929; repr. New York: Russell & Russell, 1956), 81-84. 

8 A partly conjectural reading of duos lapides vinos et recondes \rotundosl ] vnius ponderis, qui debent 
esse fluminei. 

9 I am reading limen for limes throughout. 

10 For ymo vno reliquum in innumerabili odio rebellis affligat. 

11 For et maxime quando est in combustione, et ire versus solis ortum facias. 

12 Ugolino Nicolini, ‘La stregoneria a Perugia e in Umbria nel Medioevo: con i testi di sette processi a 
Perugia e uno a Bologna’, Bollettino della Deputazione di storia patria per I’Umbria, 84 for 1987 (1988), 
30-38. 

13 T.H. White, trans. and ed., The Book of Beasts, being a translation from a Latin Bestiary of the 
Twelfth Century (London: Jonathan Cape, 1954), 79-80, says nothing whatever about the camel’s urination, 
but one is presumably to imagine the man crouching with knees bent outward. 

14 Lynn Thorndike described this portion of the MS in his article, ‘Imagination and magic: force of 
imagination on the human body and of magic on the human mind’, in Melanges Eugene Tisserant, 1 
(Vatican City: Biblioteca Vaticana, 1964), 353-8. 

15 Picatrix, 161. 

16 Picatrix, pp. 16 (friendship, love), 17 (obedience), 18 (destruction), 18-19 (construction), 19 
(separation, wrath of king, release, flight), 20 (scorpions), 21 (love, destruction), 22 (fertility). 

17 Edward Peters, The Magician, the Witch, and the Law (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1978), 110-37. 

18 Bodleian Library, MS Wood empt. 18, fol. 32r. On the famous SATOR-AREPO square see especially 
Heinz Hofmann, Das Satorquadrat: Zur Geschichte und Deutung eines antiken Wortquadrats (Bielefelder 
Papiere zur Linguistik und Literaturwissenschaft, 6) (Bielefeld: Universitat Bielefeld, Fakultat fur 
Linguistik und Literaturwissenschaft, 1977) and Richard Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 77-8. 

19 Bodleian Library, MS e Mus. 219, fol. 186v. 

20 Taking semissi for semissis, genitive of semis, a coin. 

21 Jerry Stannard, ‘Greco-Roman material medica in medieval Germany’, Bulletin of the History oj 
Medicine, 46 (1972), 467. 

22 E.g., British Library, Sloane MS 38, fols 24v ( multa mirabilia que videbis ) and 25v (in ista 
operacione videbis mirabilia)', De Nigromancia of Roger Bacon, ed. and trans. Michael-Albion Macdonald 
(Gillette, N.J.: Heptangle, 1988), 81; Picatrix: The Latin Version of the Ghayat Al-Hakim, ed. David 
Pingree (London: Warburg Institute, 1986), 18-19. See also Shakespeare’s Merry Wives of Windsor, V. 1, 
lines 11-12. For an off-colour adaptation of the theme see the text given in Charles Burnett, Magic and 
Divination in the Middle Ages: Texts and Techniques in the Islamic and Christian Worlds (Aldershot: 


Variorum, 1996), IX, p. 7. 

23 W. Braekman, Magische experimenten en toverpraktijken uit een middelnederlands handschrift 
(Ghent: Seminarie voor Volkskunde, 1966), 38-40 (also published separately in Verslagen en mededelingen 
van de Koninklijke Vlaamse Academie voor Taal- en Letterkunde, 1966, 53-118). On the concept of 
lovesickness, see Mary Frances Wack, Lovesickness in the Middle Ages: The Viaticum and its 
Commentaries (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1990). 

24 I have discussed the topic in my article, ‘Erotic magic in medieval Europe’, in Joyce Salisbury, ed., 
Sex in the Middle Ages: A Book of Essays (New York: Garland, 1991), 30-55, giving fuller discussion and 
documentation. loan P. Couliano, Eros and Magic in the Renaissance, trans. Margaret Cook (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1987), interprets certain dimensions of the subject. See also Frederic C. 
Tubach, Index exemplorum: A Handbook of Medieval Religious Tales (FF Communications, 204) (Helsinki: 
Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, Akademia Scientiarum Fennica, 1969), 242, nos 3,093 and 3,126. For early 
examples see, e.g., Marvin Meyer and Richard Smith, eds, Ancient Christian Magic: Coptic Texts of Ritual 
Power (1994), 147-69. 

25 John T. McNeill and Helena M. Gamer, Medieval Handbooks of Penance: A Translation of the 
Principal Libri poenitentiales and Selections from Related Documents (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1938), 90; cf. 252, 305; Monumenta Germaniae historica, Leges, sect. 2, 2, ed. Alfred Boretius and 
Victor Krause (Hannover: Hahn, 1897), 44. The most famous literary example is in The Romance Tristan & 
Iseult, as Retold by Joseph Bedier, trans. Hilaire Belloc and Paul Rosenfeld (New York: Thistle Press, 
1960) (and many other translations); see Dorothy James Roberts, The Enchanted Cup (New York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1953). De La Warr Benjamin Easter, ‘A Study of the Magic Elements in the 
Romans d’aventure and the Romans Bretons' (Johns Hopkins University diss., 1905), 70-73, cites the love 
potions in Cliges, the Tristan romances of Thomas and Beroul, Partonopeus, and La Violette, and an 
ambiguous potion in Dolopathos. 

26 Albertus Magnus, Book of Minerals, trans. Dorothy Wyckoff (Oxford: Clarendon, 1967), 73; 
Michael R. Best and Frank H. Brightman, eds, The Book of Secrets of Albertus Magnus of the Virtues of 
Herbs, Stones and Certain Beasts, also A Book of the Marvels of the World (Oxford: Clarendon, 1973), 21; 
Evans, Magical Jewels, 197; Joan Evans and Mary S. Serjeantson, eds, English Mediaeval Lapidaries 
(Early English Text Society, orig. ser., 190) (London: Oxford University Press, 1933), 59, 68. 

27 P.V. Taberner, Aphrodisiacs: The Science and the Myth (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1985), 58; Lynn Thorndike, The History of Magic and Experimental Science (New York: Macmillan 
and Columbia University Press, 1923-58), vol. 2, 555. 

