SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 4/39  |  CHARS: 71934-96776 of 925451
============================================================

e and Nicholas Eymericus studied works of 
magic in the interest of analysing them, refuting their assumptions, and 
condemning them more effectively, while Albert the Great and Roger Bacon had 
theoretical interests in the occult that grew in large part out of their scientific 
research. There may well have been many less known figures who took a keen 
interest in knowing about magic through widely disseminated books such as 
Picatrix, even if they did not intend to practise this learning. 1 

The magical texts probably of greatest interest from a theoretical or scientific 
viewpoint were integrally conceived and titled works, even if these were 
pseudonymous or anonymous, as opposed to miscellanies. Works integrally 


composed by single authors, such as al-Kindi or Marsilio Ficino, or 
pseudonymous works ascribed to Aristotle, were likely not only to prescribe 
recipes for specific purposes but to develop more or less explicit theories of 
occult process. Miscellanies might contain material that implies an 
understanding of how magic worked, but they were less likely to develop a 
theoretical viewpoint explicitly or coherently. To be sure, this distinction 
between an integrally conceived work and a miscellany is by no means rigid. 
While Picatrix is one of the great works of Arabic astral magic, infused with a 
more or less coherent theory of how magic operates,- it is also in large measure a 
compilation. The Pseudo-Albertan Book of Secrets is systematic in its organizing 
principles - it surveys the magical properties first of herbs (nettle, wild teasel, 
periwinkle, and so forth, one by one), then of stones, then of beasts, and finally 
of the planets - but the contents gathered under these headings might be found in 
a miscellany as well, without benefit of organizing structure. Yet while the 
distinction between an integrally conceived work and a miscellany is thus not 
absolute, it is none the less real. 

It is a distinction worth noting, because the works of magic that survive from 
medieval Europe include large numbers of miscellanies, and in light of their 
importance they have been too little studied. When we read in a judicial record 
or a literary work of a magician who owned and used a book of magic, this is at 
least as likely to have been a miscellany as an integrally composed treatise. For 
while miscellanies may be of less interest from a theoretical viewpoint, they had 
compensating features that may often have made them more useful to the 
practising magician. The materials assembled in them were selected not to round 
off some theoretical notion of magic and its component parts, but because 
individually they were taken to be effective. They are documents of use, 
analogous to the Greek magical papyri.- A treatise on conjuration, such as the 
Thesaurus necromantiae ascribed to Roger Bacon,- may explain systematically 
how conjuring spirits works, and how different spirits are related to different 
astronomical bodies; a necromantic miscellany is more likely to lay out a single 
‘experiment’ ( experimentum , or, less often, experientia, a concrete and 
experienced application of ritual for magical effect), with all of the required 
preparations and conjurations, step by step. Historians of magic who are mainly 
interested in the field from the perspective of intellectual history or the history of 
science are likely to be drawn mostly to single-author treatises, but those 
interested in the actual practice of magic and its relevance to cultural, social, 
judicial, religious and political history must take a keen interest in miscellanies 


as well. Furthermore, whereas an integrated treatise claims to represent a point 
of view distilled and isolated from the course of its own development, a 
miscellany can more fully serve as a biographical document illustrating moments 
in the life of its compiler, presenting its reader with the challenge of discerning 
the trajectory of its compiler’s shifting interests. 

Willy Braekman has edited the magical portions of a Middle Dutch 
miscellany of the fifteenth century, now at the Wellcome Historical Medical 
Library in London.- This manuscript illustrates the variety of magical materials 
we might expect to find in a miscellany. Included along with non-magical 
material are experiments to identify the thief who has stolen milk, beer or wax; 
to become invisible; to see ‘extraordinary things’; to learn about past or future 
events; to ease childbirth; to transport oneself rapidly by use of an ointment 
(made of seven herbs, goat’s fat and bat’s blood). Various love charms or 
summoning experiments are given, as well as a procedure for preventing a wife 
from having intercourse with another man by tracing a circle around her genitals 
with the tail of a lizard. 

In the category of magical trickery or parlour games are experiments to cause 
people to grow dirty while bathing; to cause white birds to hatch from the eggs 
of black birds; to make a newly hatched peacock white; to cause a woman to 
leap naked from her bath; to cause a dog to dance; to compel a horse to stand 
still; to hold a serpent in one’s hand without harm, and to cause a horse to 
collapse as if dead. More useful are procedures to expel mice and flies by use of 
magical images. The manuscript gives the first half of a moon book, explaining 
the moon’s influence under each zodiacal sign. And it includes a set of 
experiments ascribed to Solomon, and twelve experiments involving snake-skin, 
widely attributed to Johannes Paulinus but in fact translated from the Arabic. 
Most of the experiments in this manuscript are of natural magic, but not all: 
Braekman’s no. 20, especially, calls upon ‘the power and might of these spirits, 
Beheydraz, Anleyuz, [and] Manitaynus’, to aid in the magical seduction of a 
woman. 

Bodleian MS Rawlinson D 252, a fifteenth-century English manuscript, 
contains formulas for explicitly demonic magic, to which Frank Klaassen has 
called my attention, and which he will describe in his own research now in 
progress. It is devoted chiefly to lengthy conjurations intended for divination, 
most often to detect thieves, although there are multi-purpose experiments as 
well. The bulk of the material is in Latin, but the manuscript also gives lengthy 
passages in Middle English. The manuscript differs from Braekman’s Middle 


Dutch text in various ways, of which three are immediately apparent: it is more 
consistently devoted to magical experiments, most of its operations are for a 
particular kind of magic, and it more regularly calls upon the aid of demons. 1 
will refer to this miscellany on occasion in following chapters. 

Codex latinus Monacensis 849 

We turn now to the specific focus of this study, a fifteenth-century manuscript in 
the Bavarian State Library, Clm 849, and in particular the texts on folios 3 
through 108 of this manuscript. (The material on the following folios is related 
in kind and approximately contemporary but in different hands and different 
languages, and evidently not intended as part of the same compilation.) The 
compiler of this main block of material was evidently German; the appended 
materials seem to have come from various sources, and one passage contains a 
formula in Italian. 2 The manuscript is a small one, approximately 8% inches high 
and 5% inches wide. The description of this manuscript in the published 
catalogue is nondescript: it appears there as a book of incantations, exorcisms 
and sundry bewitchments.- Lynn Thorndike made no reference to it in his 
monumental History of Magic,- and while he did cite it briefly in a later article 
published in a festschrift,- it has generally been neglected in the literature on 
witchcraft and magic. In my survey of Magic in the Middle Ages I highlighted 
this text, but without examining it fully and systematically.- Yet it deserves 
careful attention, not because it was influential but because of what it represents. 
It is a rare example, essentially intact, of what must once have been a flourishing 
genre: the manual of explicitly demonic magic, or necromancy. It is clearly a 
miscellany, with little linkage, clustering or other organization of its materials, 
and no effort to develop a coherent theory to support or explain the 
‘experiments’ it contains. Yet its limitations are also its strengths: the lack of a 
systematic framework means that each section, essentially self-contained, has a 
coherence and clarity often lacking in more fully developed writings. 

The first two folios of the manuscript are missing, a circumstance which may 
help to explain how the manuscript evaded detection and thus survived. (Indeed, 
it is not uncommon for the first folio of a magical manuscript to be missing.)- 
The 107 folios that remain in the main block (rectifying an error in foliation 
gives us one extra folio) are devoted primarily to a series of forty-two magic 
experiments. Interspersed with these are a version of the Liber consecracionum 
(no. 31); a list of spirits, with descriptions of the forms in which they appear and 


the functions they perform (no. 34); a manual of astral magic (no. 37); a list of 
favourable and unfavourable days for writing magical inscriptions (no. 46); and 
a fragment of a chemical prescription, with a gloss in the German language (no. 
47). 

All but a few of the experiments fall into the three main categories. There are 
twelve illusionist experiments, designed to make things appear other than as they 
are - to conjure forth an illusory banquet or castle, to obtain a wondrous means 
of transportation (usually a demon in the form of a horse) that will carry the 
magician across land or water, or to make a dead person seem alive or vice 
versa. Seven psychological experiments are intended to have influence on 
people’s intellects or wills - to arouse love or hatred, to gain favour at court, to 
constrain the will of others, or to drive a person mad. Fully seventeen 
experiments are divinatory techniques for gaining knowledge of future, past, 
distant or hidden things. Most of these experiments entail catoptromancy, or 
scrying: the magician’s assistant, usually a young boy, stares at a reflecting 
surface until he sees figures, taken here to be apparitions of spirits, who can 
reveal the desired information. As should become clear in following chapters, 
these three types of experiment are significantly different from one another: we 
find an element of playful fantasy in the illusionist experiments, an often violent 
effort at coercion in the psychological ones, and an insistence on detecting truth 
and righting wrongs in most of the divinatory ones. Differences in tone and in 
purpose are accompanied by variations in technique: conjuring spirits is of 
central importance in most of the experiments, but the magic circle plays its 
most prominent role in the illusionist rituals, sympathetic magic is more 
prevalent in the psychological experiments, and scrying is itself the key to most 
of the divination. Rather than a single technique, the necromancy of this 
handbook represents a congeries of distinct procedures, most of which can be 
sorted fairly neatly into these three categories. 

Roughly speaking, we can say that the moving forces behind the magic of the 
handbook are the exercise of imagination, the hunger for power and the thirst for 
knowledge. To be sure, all three elements are at work in all the necromantic 
experiments. One might say that the main issues raised by the practice of 
necromancy are those of the relationship between sacrality and power: the 
necromancers perceived their art and office as sacred and saw themselves as 
invoking the sacred powers of heaven by which they could constrain the equally 
numinous but malign and treacherous powers of hell. At the same time, one must 
recognize that all these experiments required exercise of imagination and were 



inspired in large part by curiosity. Yet the characteristic emphases differ, and we 
may safely generalize that it is the imaginative element which dominates in the 
illusionist experiments, the quest for power in psychological experiments, and 
the yearning for knowledge in the divinatory ones. 

All forms of necromancy presupposed and played upon tensions. Basic to 
illusionist experiments was the tension between fantasy and reality, all within the 
border realm in which readers and practitioners were asked to suspend their 
disbelief, or perhaps rather to entertain possibilities that would normally defy 
belief but within this ritual context might gain credibility. In psychological 
experiments the tension was chiefly between the will of the necromancer and 
that of the victim over whom the master sought to exercise his power. In 
divinatory experiments it was perhaps most importantly a tension between truth 
and deception; these rituals were intended to ascertain truth but left themselves 
open to the constant hazard of error. 

The materials in the manuscript that do not fit into these three categories are a 
procedure for gaining knowledge with the aid of a demon tutor (no. 1), a brief 
experiment called the ‘Key of Pluto’ for opening all locks (no. 26), a 
fragmentary operation for averting harm (no. 44), a chemical recipe (no. 47), and 
generic materials that can serve diverse ends (nos 31, 32, 34, 36, 37, 42 and 46). 

Strikingly absent from this compilation are magical rituals for healing and 
protection and necromantic procedures for inflicting bodily harm or death. The 
judicial records provide ample evidence of necromancers charged with 
undermining the health of their victims, and other necromantic literature 
evidently provided guidelines for such magic. The compiler of this manuscript 
seems not to have been a man of conventional morality or scrupulous 
disposition, yet he seems also not to have taken an interest in these kinds of 
magic. Not all necromantic manuals were squeamish in this regard. The Key of 
Solomon insists that magic must be used only to glorify God and extend 
kindness to neighbours, but in fact the work prescribes methods for causing 
enmity, war, death, destruction, and so forth; as E.M. Butler says, the intentions 
‘seem to have been of the best; but they were literally of the kind which pave the 
way to hell’.- 

The following table shows the order of the forty-two experiments and other 
materials, most of which are assigned to three broad categories: psychological 
(‘Psych.’), illusionist (‘Ulus.’), and divinatory (‘Divin.’). The numbers for each 
item are editorial additions. 


Table A . Experiments in Clm 849, fols 3-108 


No. Purpose 

Fols 

Type 

1. For gaining knowledge of the liberal arts 

3r-5v 


2. For causing a person to lose his senses 

6r-7v 

Psych. 

3. For arousing a woman’s love 

8r—1 lv 

Psych. 

4. For gaining dignity and honour 

llv-13v 

Psych. 

5. For arousing hatred between friends 

13v-15r 

Psych. 

6. For obtaining a banquet 

15r-18v 

lllus. 

7. For obtaining a castle 

18v-21r 

Illus. 

8. For obtaining a boat 

21r-23r 

lllus. 

9. For obtaining a horse 

23v-25v 

lllus. 

10. For resuscitating a dead person 

25v-28r 

lllus. 

11. For invisibility 

28r-29v 

lllus. 

12. For obtaining a woman’s love 

29v-31v 

Psych. 

13. For constraining a man, woman, spirit or beast 

32r-33r 

Psych. 

14. For obtaining a horse 

33v-34r 

lllus. 

15. For obtaining a flying throne 

34r-35v 

lllus. 

16. For finding something in sleep 

35v-36r 

Divin. 

17. For obtaining a horse 

36r-36v 

lllus. 

18. The mirror of Floron, for revelation of past, present and 

37r-38r 

Divin. 

future 

19. The mirror of Floron, second version 

38r-39v 

Divin. 

20. Another way of using a mirror 

39v-40v 

Divin. 

21. For invisibility 

40v 

lllus. 

22. For discovering a thief or murderer by gazing into a vessel 41r-42r 

Divin. 

23. First mirror of Lilith 

42r-43r 

Divin. 

24. For learning about any uncertain thing by gazing into a 

43r-43v 

Divin. 

crystal 

25. For information about a theft by gazing into a crystal 

26. Key of Pluto, for opening all locks 

27. For obtaining information about a theft by gazing into a 

43v-44r 

44v 

44v-45v, 

Divin. 

fingernail 


51r, 

46v-47v 

Divin. 





28. For obtaining information by gazing at a bone 

47v-49r 

Divin. 

29. The true art of the basin 

49r-49v 

Divin. 

30. Twelve names for making spirits appear in a boy’s hand 

49v-50v 

Divin. 

31. The Book of Consecrations 

52r-59v 


32. Conjuration of Satan/Mirage 

59v-62v 


33. For obtaining information from a mirror 

62v-65r 

Divin. 

34. List of spirits 

65v-65r 

bis 

35. For obtaining a woman’s love 

65r bis— 
67v 

Psych. 

36. Generic preparation for conjuring spirits 

67v-68v 

Divin. 

37. Manual of astral magic 

68v-96v 


38. For obtaining information about a theft by gazing into a 
fingernail 

96v-99v 

Divin. 

39. For obtaining information by gazing into a fingernail 

99v-103r 

Divin. 

40. For obtaining information about a theft by gazing into a 

103r- 

Divin. 

fingernail 

105v 


41. For discovering hidden treasure in sleep 

106r- 

106v 

Divin. 

42. The name Semiforas 

106v- 

107r 


43. For obtaining a horse 

107r- 

107v 

nius. 

44. Fragment of an experiment for averting harm 

107v 


45. For invisibility 

107v- 

108r 

nius. 

46. Favourable and unfavourable days of the month for 

108r- 


inscriptions 

108v 


47. Fragment of a chemical prescription (with a note in 
German) 

108v 


After the first (truncated) experiment in the manual, 

an entire series of 


fourteen experiments can be gathered into four clusters, two psychological and 
two illusionist: 


Cluster 1: Nos 2-5 (for inflicting dementia, gaining the love of any woman, 
obtaining dignity and honour, arousing hatred between friends) 



Cluster 11: Nos 6-11 (for obtaining a banquet, obtaining a castle, obtaining a 
boat, obtaining a horse, resuscitating a dead person, obtaining invisibility) 

Cluster 111: Nos 12-13 (for obtaining a woman’s love, constraining a man or 
woman or spirit or beast) 

Cluster IV: Nos 14-15 (for obtaining a horse, obtaining a flying throne) 

Much less of the subsequent material falls into clusters, and the groupings that 
do occur are devoted exclusively to divination (unless we count the astral magic 
of no. 37 as itself constituting a cluster): 

Cluster V: Nos 18-20 (the mirror of Floron, alternative version of same, 
another way of using a mirror) 

Cluster VI: Nos 22-25 (for discover a thief or murderer by gazing into a 
vessel, first mirror of Lilit[h], for knowing about any uncertain thing by 
gazing into a crystal, for information about a theft by gazing into a crystal) 

Cluster VII: Nos 27-30 (for obtain information about a theft by gazing into a 
fingernail, for obtaining information by gazing at a bone, the true art of the 
basin, twelve names to make spirits appear in boy’s hand) 

Cluster VIII: Nos 38-41 (for obtaining information about a theft by gazing 
into a fingernail, for obtaining information by gazing into a fingernail, for 
obtaining information about a theft by gazing into a fingernail, for 
discovering hidden treasure in sleep) 

Before no. 35 the manuscript gives the heading, ‘Here begin good and tried 
experiments’, which suggests that the compiler either reordered materials he was 
taking from elsewhere or copied this particular experiment from the beginning of 
some other compilation. The arrangement of folios within the gatherings is 
highly erratic (with many folios excised, and others elsewhere inserted), but 
apart from the two folios missing from the front of the manuscript, there is in 
general a high degree of continuity both within and between the gatherings, the 
main exception being in the apparently careless fragmentation of experiment no. 
27. Ji This discontinuity existed already, and the folios in question had already 
been excised, at the time of the original (fifteenth-century) foliation. In other 


words, it is likely that we have the necromancer’s manual nearly intact, and 
possible that, despite the codicological complexity, the discontinuities that exist 
are the result of the compiler’s carelessness rather than later loss of text or errors 
in binding. 

Following all this material from fols 3 through 108 are 48 originally separate 
folios, 109-156, which again contain miscellaneous material: a conjuration of a 
demon named Mirage (given fols 109r—118r and again fols 139r—146r); German 
magico-medical prescriptions (fols 119r—132v); a series of divinatory 
experiments (fols 133r-134v), with a short ‘prayer’ in Italian (asking God to 
ensure the truth of the ensuing revelation) to be recited into the ear of a child 
who serves as medium;- the Liber consecracionum (fols 135r-139r); a lunar 
calendar (fol. 146r); instructions for magical circles (fol. 146v); a treatise on 
astral magic, the Opus Zoal et angelorum et spirituum eius (fols 147r-154v), and 
a German book of lunar astrology (fols 155r-156v). This material will be 
discussed here mainly in so far as it resembles or otherwise relates to the main 
block of material. The only materials from folios 109-156 that are edited here 
are the second version of the Liber consecracionum (given along with no. 31, in 
parallel columns) and the conjuration of Mirage (given alongside no. 32, in 
parallel columns). 

It may seem - and may indeed be - hazardous to devote such attention to a 
manuscript that survives in this condition. It is possible that the missing first 
folio contained a title, named an author, or gave other information that would be 
important for locating this text within its historical context. If we had such 
information we might be able to tell more confidently whether this compilation 
is in fact unique or whether there are other copies.- While recognizing the 
hazards of proceeding with this project, I am moved to do so chiefly by the 
conviction that this is an exceptionally rich and interesting compilation, that one 
of the most urgent needs in the history of magic is detailed analysis of specific 
manuscripts representative of the materials magicians are likely to have used, 
and that such texts thus hold significance going well beyond their meagre 
intellectual pretensions. I will make some effort to situate the component parts of 
the text within their literary context - to cite sources and parallels. For the most 
part, however, I will focus on the contents of this specific compilation, this 
microcosm of clerical magic as it was known in the late Middle Ages. 


Necromancy and Necromancers in Fifteenth-Century Munich 


The fact that our necromantic manuscript is now in the Bavarian State Library is 
not, of course, any indication that it came originally from Munich or even from 
Bavaria, but its inclusion among the earlier codices of the collection suggests 
that, wherever its materials were first assembled, they may have been brought to 
Munich and acquired by the ducal library at an early date. Even if this 
connection is conjectural, it may thus be interesting to inquire what we know of 
the practice and perception of necromancy in late medieval Munich. The short 
answer to this question is that not a great deal is known about necromancers and 
necromancy specifically in and around Munich in the fifteenth century, yet there 
are some clues that may help place Clm 849 within a general historical context. 

The witch trials conducted in the Dauphine during the years 1428-47 provide 
an interesting side light of possible relevance. One of the many subjects brought 
before the judges in this campaign was a sixty-year-old man, Jubertus of 
Bavaria, from Regensburg, tried in 1437 at Briangon.- Apart from accusations 
more or less typical of the incipient prosecution for conspiratorial witchcraft 
(flight to nocturnal assemblies, killing of infants, etc.), Jubertus was charged 
with activities more often found in connection with clerical necromancy: 

First, the aforesaid Jubertus said and confessed, under freely taken oath ... 
that he is sixty years of age, and that for ten years and more he served a 
certain powerful man in Bavaria who was called Johannes Cunalis, who is a 
priest and plebanus, in a city called Munich in Bavaria, near Bohemia. 

Likewise, he said and confessed that this Johannes Cunalis had a book of 
necromancy [librum de nigromancia ], and that when he who spoke opened 
this book at once there appeared to him three demons, one named Luxuriosus, 
another Superbus, and the third Avarus, [all of them] devils. And the first 
appeared to him in the form of a charming maiden of twelve years, and she 
slept with him at night and took their pleasure together. 

