SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 19/39  |  CHARS: 431215-456205 of 925451
============================================================

se of the experiment (‘that you should have no power to harm 
me’), to protect the master (‘that you should forthwith have these terrors 
removed’, ‘that you should avenge me against him who is trying to harm me’), 
or to obey the master’s command generally (‘that you should obey my 
command’).- The child medium may be conjured not only to tell the truth but, at 
an earlier stage, to gaze into his fingernail (‘that you should gaze into [your] nail 
and see whether it becomes bright or not’).- 

In some conjurations, to be sure, the distinction between summons and 
execution breaks down. In divinatory experiments the spirits may be 
simultaneously commanded to come, to make themselves seen, and to provide 
information (‘that you should appear to me and give true responses’, ‘that you 
should come and appear and tell me the truth’, ‘that you should come and appear 
and reveal this to us’, ‘that you should appear and respond and reveal all the 
truth’, ‘that you should appear and reveal to us the truth’, ‘that you should come 
and answer me and tell the truth’).- Elsewhere they may told to come and bring 
an object (‘that you should come to me, bringing a consecrated ring’), to come 
and transport the necromancer (‘that you should come to me without delay, and 
carry me to such-and-such a place’), to come and consecrate an object (‘that you 
should come here and consecrate this ring’), or simply to come and fulfill the 
master’s will (‘that you should come to me and carry out my entire will’).— 
Executing conjurations need not be addressed to the spirits by whose power 


the operation is done. Experiment no. 12 contains two instructions to the woman 
whose passionate love is required, although the second of these vacillates 
between the second and the third person: ‘that you should be unable to sleep 
until you complete my libidinous desire’ and ‘that, as the hart longs for the 
fountain of water [Ps. 41:2 Vult.], so you, N., should long for my love; and as the 
raven longs for the carcasses of dead people, so you should long for me [.s’z'd]; 
and as this wax melts before the fire, so you, N., should long for my love, so that 
you are unable ...’ In experiment no. 11, for a cloak of invisibility, the master 
conjures the cloak itself ‘that no one may be able to see me’. In the simple 
experiments to obtain a horse, as in the complex experiment to procure a flying 
throne, the master conjures the horse or the throne to transport him, usually to a 
specified location (‘that you should carry me’, ‘that you should lead me to such- 
and-such a place’). - 


A bond of Satan or Mirage 

One lengthy conjuration appears both in the Munich necromancer’s handbook 
(no. 32) and again twice in the appended material; versions of it by three 
different hands are thus included in Clm 849.- The two isolated versions, which 
agree quite closely in their wording, are addressed to the demon (or ‘ancient 
serpent’) named Mirage; the version incorporated into the manual, which differs 
markedly from these at many points, addresses the Devil, or Satan, ‘most wicked 
enemy of the faith, death of the human race, tempter of righteousness, lover of 
evils, root and kindling of vices, seducer of humans, and master’, ‘most wicked 
dragon’, ‘accursed and most mendacious spirit’ and ‘author of diabolical power, 
inventor of evils’. The conjuration begins anomalously with a statement 
regarding the powers being brought to bear against the Devil (‘may the angels 
and archangels accuse you ... may the elect of God accuse you’), followed by a 
prayer for divine aid (‘God ... I invoke your holy name ... I humbly implore that 
you may deign to give me aid against this spirit Satan’). These elements are 
followed by simply commands addressed to the spirit himself (‘Hear, therefore, 
Devil ... come forth ... I adjure you ... to be subject to my commands and carry 
them out’). The instructions are for the most part purely generic: ‘I adjure you ... 
to do quickly whatever I command you’, or ‘to do quickly whatever I order and 
command of you’, or ‘I adjure and constrain and command you ... to obey me 
without any impediment or harm or wound or affliction to my body or soul’. At 
the end, however, the instruction is specific but allows for such variation that the 


effect is still to make this a generic conjuration, for virtually any purpose: 

[Come] to me in this hour, without any harm or injury or affliction to my soul 
or my body, or send another [spirit] or have him come, who will know 
perfectly how to fulfil my every desire, and will not withdraw from me until I 
have given him leave and he has fully satisfied my will. I conjure you by all 
that is written above to make a spirit come to me carrying gold and silver 
[coins] and [hidden] treasures, before I withdraw from this place. And as 
often as I invoke him, let him appear at once, benign and humble, harming no 
one, and ministering to me in all things, and fulfilling my will. So be it, so be 
it, amen. And bring or send me a spirit willing and competent in all 
knowledge. May he have the power to make me invisible whenever I wish. 
And let him please me, and be always under my power. And provide him also 
with the power to consecrate books and experiments, and everything that I 
wish. Amen, amen, amen. 

Repeatedly the will of the conjuror is identified with that of God: the spirit is 
told that God himself commands him, or that the conjuror does so not by his own 
power but by that of God, or ‘by the power which I have over you, Mirage, 
given me by God almighty in baptism and the other sacraments’. At one point 
the conjuration reads, ‘The Word made flesh commands you, He who was born 
of the virgin commands you, Jesus of Nazareth commands you, He who created 
you commands you to carry out quickly what I ask or wish to have from you or 
desire to know; the more you delay in doing what 1 command you, the greater 
will be your punishment from day to day.’ The reminder of the punishment 
awaiting the spirit on the Day of Judgement, and the threat of heightened 
torment as a penalty for disobedience, is also repeated - somewhat as elsewhere 
(no. 2) a spirit is threatened with being cast forever into the depths of the sea.- 
The conjuration of Mirage, from the supplementary material in the codex, is 
followed by material that the main block does not take over: a set of instructions 
for constructing a circle in a secret location, with various prayers, and 
supplementary conjurations in which Mirage is threatened with intensified pains 
if he does not present himself: ‘If not, I exorcize you that the chains of your 
punishment may be rife with sulpur and pitch.’- The spirit is to be conjured a 
second and third time, if necessary, but no more.- 


Exorcisms and conjurations 


Adolf Franz published a lengthy formula of exorcism taken from a West 
Frankish manuscript of the ninth century, which reads in part: 


... 1 conjure you, Devil, Satan, Enemy, 

• by God the Father almighty; 

• and by those virtues which the Lord himself made and makes; 

• by those angels he has before himself in [his] mind; ... 

• by those four animals which uphold the world itself; 

• by every good creation that God has made in heaven and on earth; 

• and by the light and the earth and all its creeping things; 

by all these things 1 conjure you that you should not have power to remain, 
for he commands you who ordered you to be cast down from the kingdom of 
heaven on high. Hear, therefore, and be afraid [Audi ergo et time ergo]. Devil, 
Satan, Enemy; you are banned, and again I speak to you and conjure you 

• by that king who rules and commands all things ... 

Again 1 have said to you, O infernal enemies, by all things that 1 have had in 
mind for you [in] so great a conjuration as this, that you should not have 
power to remain or to do harm or to rebel.... I exorcize you, O accursed one, 
most unclean spirit, basilisk dragon, noxious serpent ... that you should go 
out from this temple of God ... 1 exorcize you, O unclean spirit, author of 
sins, deceiver of souls, envious one, insatiable homicide who endeavoured to 
kill the immortal man whom God created by his power.... In the name of Our 
Lord Jesus Christ I adjure you, O enemy ... I conjure you and entreat 
[obtestor] you, O enemy, [that] you should not have power to remain here in 
this person’s soul or body ... I adjure you 

• by the gates of Paradise; 

• by the six golden candlesticks [Apoc 1:12]... 

I speak to you in truth, O unclean spirit, dragon, I adjure you, 

• by the Holy Spirit; 

• I adjure you by the six fiery furnaces; 

• I adjure you by the cherubim and seraphim; 

• I adjure you by the wings of the winds; 

• I adjure you by the mystery of Christ’s [passion]; 

• I adjure you by the resurrection of Christ the Lord; 

• I adjure you by the precious pearls; 

• I adjure you by the years [and] by the days; 

• I adjure you by the passion of the saints; 

• I adjure you by him who who freed the people Israel from the Red Sea, who freed Daniel from 
the lion’s den, who illumined the blind, healed the paralytics, [and] cleansed the lepers. 

I adjure you now by him, O enemy, unclean one, inveterate dragon, [that] you 
should depart from the soul and withdraw from the body or from all the 
inward parts of [this] servant of God.... 




It is not I who command you, nor my sins, O most unclean spirit, but the 
immaculate lamb, Jesus Christ Our Lord, the Son of God, commands you. 

The angels press upon [ urguent ] you, the archangels press upon you, the 
prophets press upon you, the apostles press upon you, the martyrs press upon 
you, the confessors press upon you. Therefore may the arts of the Devil fail 
[clefici[a]nt ergo artes diaboli] by day [and] by night ... 

I exorcize you, O author of diabolical power, inventor of malice 

The essential elements of this formula are exactly those seen in necromantic 
conjurations of a much later era. There are, to be sure, distinctive 
embellishments. First, the devil being expelled is not only named (Devil, Satan, 
Enemy) but characterized: he is the ‘accursed one, most unclean spirit, basilisk 
dragon, noxious serpent’, or the ‘unclean spirit, author of sins, deceiver of souls, 
envious one, insatiable homicide who endeavoured to kill the immortal man 
whom God created by his power’, and as the ‘author of diabolical power, the 
inventor of malice’, and so forth. Second, he is expelled from the energumen’s 
body as well as his soul. Third, it is expressly said not merely that the exorcist 
commands in the name of Christ (as in Acts 16:18) but that Christ himself is the 
one who commands, even if through the exorcist. Fourth, various sacred figures 
are represented as participating in the exorcist’s struggle with the malign spirit: 
the angels, archangels, prophets, apostles, martyrs and confessors all place 
pressure upon the possessing devil (i urguent , for urgent), or denounce him 
(reading arguunt). And fifth, the second-person address is interrupted with a 
third-person subjunctive urging that the Devil’s arts or snares may come to 
naught. The essential structure of the formula remains unaffected by these 
elements, but the network of relations is rendered more complex. The exorcist 
insults the spirit with whom he is engaged in struggle, identifies his own action 
as that of Christ, and calls upon the angels and saints not simply as possessors of 
power that can be tapped through invocation but as active participants in the 
contest. The representation of the exorcism as a cosmic combat, perhaps a local 
instance of that apocalyptic conflict that Christ initiated in his own exorcisms 
and carried forward in his passion and resurrection, here becomes exceptionally 
dramatic and explicit. 

As already indicated, the conjurations of the necromancer are identical in 
form to the exorcisms designed to dispel demons. The resemblance may be seen 
in a manual for exorcizing the possessed that was printed several times in the 
late fifteenth century went by the title The Conjuration of Malign Spirits 


Dwelling in the Bodies of People, as it is Done in Saint Peter.— The simplest 
form of exorcism used here is simply, ‘I exorcize you, unclean spirit, in the name 
of God the Father almighty & and in the name of Jesus Christ his Son and by 
the power of the Holy Spirit & that you should recede from this servant of God, 
N.’ Like the conjurations of exorcists, however, the formulas used here become 
extended through repetition of the instruction and through numerous 
invocations: 

1 conjure you, O Devil, by the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and by 
the patriarchs and prophets, apostles, evangelists, martyrs, confessors, virgins, 
and all the holy men and holy women of God ... and by our Lord Jesus Christ 
1 conjure you, that you should recede from this servant of God, N. 1 conjure 
you, O Devil, by the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he endured for 
the human race, that you should recede from this servant of God, N. 1 conjure 
you, O Devil, by the holy cross on which our Lord [died for] the servant of 
God, N., that you should not be able to conceal yourself in his body, nor in his 
members, nor in his head. 1 conjure you, Devil, by the nails of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, by which his hands and feet were affixed to the cross, that you should 
withdraw from this servant of God, N., that you not be able to conceal 
yourself in his mouth or head. 1 conjure you, Devil, by the lance that 
Longinus held, by which he pierced the side of our Lord Jesus Christ, and 
blood and water flowed out, that you not be able to conceal yourself in his 
throat or on his tongue or under his tongue, or in his other members. 1 conjure 
you, Devil, by the death and burial of Christ, from which he rose from the 
dead on the third day, that you not be able to conceal yourself in his bowels or 
inward parts. 1 conjure you, Devil, by the resurrection of our Lord Jesus 
Christ, in which he appeared to his disciples, saying, ‘It is 1, do not be afraid,’ 
and he commanded them, saying, ‘Go into all the world and preach the gospel 
to every creatures; he who believes and is baptized will be saved, but he who 
does not believe will be condemned’; by the aforesaid words I conjure and 
admonish you that you should recede from this servant of God, N. I conjure 
you, O Devil, by the ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you should 
recede from this servant of God, N. I conjure you, Devil, by the Holy Spirit, 
the Paraclete most high, whom our Lord Jesus entrusted to his disciples in 
fiery tongues, that you should recede from this servant of God, N., and not 
return any more, nor make any [spirit] return to him, and as God separated 
heaven from earth, truth from falsehood, good from evil, sweet from bitter, so 


may you be separated from this servant of God and not be able to approach 
him any more ... 

The exorcist claims directly the authority of Christ, proclaiming that Christ 
himself commands the spirit to withdraw: 

He commands you, accursed devil, who walked on the sea with dry feet.... 
He commands you, accursed devil, who commanded the winds and the sea 
and the storms. He commands you, accursed devil, who ordered that you be 
cast from the heights of heaven to the depths of Earth.... 

He further threatens the spirit by reminding him of the punishments prepared for 
him: ‘Nor should you be unaware, Satan and Belzebuch, that pains and torments 
will come upon you in the day of judgement and in that eternal day when God 
will come like a fiery furnace to judge the living and the dead....’ Not only the 
general structure of the formulas but even the precise wording echoes the 
conjurations of the Munich handbook and other necromantic texts. At one point, 
for example, the manual for dispelling a demon parallels the conjuration of 
Mirage: 

You, therefore, most evil spirit, enemy of humankind, death’s plunderer 
[raptor], evader of justice [ iustitie declinator ], root of evils, font of vices, 
seducer of humans [ deductor hominum] ... master of demons ... 

You, therefore, most evil Mirage, enemy of the faith of humankind, inventor 
[repertor] of death, herald of injustice [ iniusticie declarator ], root of evils, 
inciter of vices, seducer of humans [seductor hominis ], master of demons .. 

Unlike the rite in this oft-published work, the exorcism of elves and other 
‘demons’ from a fifteenth-century medico-magical manuscript makes no 
pretence of official status, yet it is identical in its basic form to other exorcisms 
and conjurations: 

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, amen. I 
conjure you, elves and all kinds of demons, of the night or of the day, by the 
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and the undivided Trinity, and by the 
intercession of the most blessed and glorious ever virgin Mary, by the prayers 
of the prophets, by the merits of the patriarchs, by the intercessions 


[suffragia] of the angels and archangels, by the intervention of the apostles, 
by the passion of the martyrs, by the faith of the confessors, by the chastity of 
the virgins, and by the intercession of all the saints, and by the Seven 
Sleepers, whose names are Malchus, Maximian, Dionysius, John, 
Constantine, Serapion, [and] Mortian [MS Martimanus], and by the name of 
the Lord God which is blessed forever i^AivGi^Li^Ai^, that you should cause 
or inflict no harm or any evil on this servant of God, N., whether in sleep or 
while awake. & Christ has conquered [sic] Christ reigns ^ Christ rules ^ 
may Christ bless us & [and] defend us from every evil, & Amen. 

In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, amen. & 
In my name they will cast out demons, they will speak with new tongues, 
they will take up serpents, and if they drink any poison it will not harm them, 
[and] they will put their hands on the sick and will cure them. & Wondrous 
cross, dispeller of sorrow, recovery of health. ^ Behold the cross of the Lord; 
flee, adverse ones [ partes adverse ]. & The lion of the tribe of Judah has 
conquered, the root of David has sprouted [allam?]. ^ Christ conquers & 
Christ reigns & Christ rules ^ may Christ defend this servant of God from 
every fantasy and every vexation of the Devil, and from every evil, at every 
hour and everywhere, by the power of the holy cross ft Amen ^ agios ^ 
hyskyros ir< athanathos eleyson 

The same may be said of an exorcism of ‘malignant spirits’ found in the same 

manuscript: 

Hear, O accursed Satan, I adjure you by the name of the eternal God and of 
Our saviour, His Son Jesus Christ. Depart, trembling and sighing, overcome 
with your envy. Let there be nothing in common between you and your angels 
and the servant of God, N. Do not harm him or appear visibly before him, in 
his sleep or while he is awake. Again I conjure you demons or malignant 
spirits, whoever you are, by the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ on the 
cross, and by his bloody wounds. Again I conjure you by the death of Jesus 
Christ on the cross and the giving up of his spirit, which descended into hell 
and despoiled it, that now and henceforth you should always flee from this 
servant of God, N., and never enter into him, but go out and withdraw from 
him. Again I conjure you by the power of the words written here, if thou are 
or ye are within him, that thou shouldst or ye should (if you are many) go out 
from him, so that he may have no terror or disturbance from henceforth. This 


compels you: may the Word made flesh ^ the holy cross of Christ, the nails, 
[and] the crown of thorns drenched in the blood of the Lamb of God on the 
cross save him, defend the bearer here and everywhere from every adversity 
and perversity of the Devil. In the name of the Father, etc.— 

In exorcisms the boundary between mainstream tradition and deviant usage is 
difficult to define with precision, but the extreme cases are easy enough to 
determine. One late medieval manuscript requires that the energumen be laid 
before an altar after mass, inside a chalk diagram, with three stoles binding his 
body; another requires that the possessed person be dressed in a chasuble and 
stole and made to lie on his back, with feet turned toward the altar, while the 
exorcist recites a ritual bond (vinculum) to control the evil spirits by the power of 
various divine names.- When Niccolo Consigli was tried at Florence in 1384, 
for example, he was accused not only of summoning demons to work harm but 
also of exorcizing the possessed and thus usurping clerical prerogatives. When a 
ten-year-old girl was brought to him he cured her of possession by laying her on 
a rug, and intoning a diabolical incantation that began ‘Tant muructa? tiri? In 
comparison, the exorcisms cited above share their basic form (from declaration 
through instruction) with the necromantic conjurations we have examined, and 
they all rest on the mainstream theological assumption that the will of the 
demons can be constrained, with God’s permission and aid, and through the 
power of the sacred. The necromancers shared with fully official exorcists a 
belief in the power of the holy to command and ultimately constrain the unclean 
spirits. 

Following a suggestion of Lynn White, Andre Goddu has sought to explain 
what he sees as the ‘failure of exorcism’ in the fifteenth century largely in terms 
of a heightened consciousness of the possibility that exorcism may be 
ineffective. Faced with these diminished expectations, theologians began to 
argue that exorcism was indeed effective on the spiritual plane even if residual 
bodily effects remained. Alternatively, one could fall back on the time-honoured 
notion that if exorcism did not succeed then prima facie the condition was not 
truly one of demonic possession.- Interesting as his argument is, it rests upon 
the questionable assumption that the use of exorcism in fact declined. What 
Goddu shows is that in the October volumes of the Acta sanctorum there is 
diminished occurrence of exorcism in materials from the fifteenth century. But 
he seems to be referring mainly not to actual exorcisms performed by saints 
while they were alive, but rather expulsion of demons worked at the tombs of 


deceased saints, which have indirect relevance at most to the study of exorcism. 
More compelling is the suggestion of Nancy Caciola, that precisely in the 
fifteenth century there was increasing interest in exorcism as a quasi-liturgical 
ritual, and that extensive manuals on exorcism, with formulas and instructions 
for its use, are chiefly the produce of this century. To be sure, there were lengthy 
formulas in earlier eras, mainly derived from baptismal exorcisms, but before the 
fifteenth century exorcisms tended to be more concise, and the techniques in 
large measure improvised.- The Munich handbook was thus riding on the crest 
of a new development: what it represents is a particular version (or, from an 
orthodox perspective, perversion) of a more general interest in the elaboration 
and assembly of materials for the commanding of malign spirits. Once again we 
can see conjuration as the reverse side of a tapestry whose obverse consists of 
orthodox exorcism - both taking on new significance, as it happens, at the same 
time that literal tapestries were becoming more significant and more elaborate in 
European artistic practice. 


Notes 

1 A.G. Little, ed., Liber exemplorum ad usum praedicantium, saecido XIII compositus a quodam Fratre 
Minore Anglico de provincia Hiberniae, secundum codicem Dunelmensem editus (Aberdeen: Typis 
Academicis, 1908), 22. Barbara Newman, who is working on the theme of demon-preachers in and around 
the thirteenth century, called this text to my attention. 

2 See Richard RH. Greenfield, Traditions of Belief in Late Byzantine Demonology (Amsterdam: 
Hakkert, 1988): 277, on texts in which it appears that God is being commanded or conjured. 

3 Lester K. Little, Benedictine Maledictions: Liturgical Cursing in Romanesque France (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1993). 

4 See the curse directed against thieves in the Rawlinson necromantic manuscript, fols 121r-121v: 
Obscurentur oculi eorum ne videant et dorsum eorum semper incurua. Irruat super eos formido et pauor in 
magnitudine brachij tui. Fiant inmobiles quasi lapis, donee pertranseat populus tuns, domine, donee 
pertranceat [sic]populus tuns [sz'c] iste quempossedisti, etc .... (Cf. 124r-124v.) 

5 In the Vulgate, Song of Songs 2:7, Adiuro vos, filiae Hierusalem, per capreas cervosque camporum, 
ne suscitetis neque evigilare faciatis dilectam. 

6 C. Stephen Jaeger, The Origins of Courtliness: Civilizing Trends and the Formation of Courtly Ideals, 
939-1210 (Philadelphia, 1985), 238, citing Nicetius, Epistulae Austrasicae, in MGH Epp. Merow. et Karol, 
aev., 1/3/9, 119-22. 

