SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 9/39  |  CHARS: 191479-216062 of 925451
============================================================

uld have 
in your hand - ‘by the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and by 
almighty God, maker of heaven and earth ... that all of you, constrained and 
bound to my will and my power, should proceed hither in benign fonn, so 
that I will not fear, and should consecrate this ring in such a way that it may 
possess this power, namely that whenever 1 place it on the finger of a dead 
person, one of you will enter him, and he will appear alive as before, in the 
same likeness and form ... ’ 

When you have said this once, six spirits will at once appear at the circle, 
requesting the ring, which you will give them. When you have given it, they 
will depart, and you likewise should leave the circle, taking the sword with 
you, and not destroying the circle. 

On the sixth day, return with the sword, and say, facing south, ‘1 conjure 
you, O Brimer, Suburith, [etc.] ... that you should come to me now without 
delay, bearing the consecrated ring, so that when I place it on the finger or in 
the hand of a living person he will fall to the ground as if dead, and when 1 
take it away he will return to his former state, and when 1 place it on a dead 
person, as aforesaid, a spirit will enter him and he will appear alive as before 

When you have said all this four times, first toward the south, and likewise 
toward the west, then toward the north and toward the east, you will see 
toward the east someone coming on horseback, who, when he arrives at the 
circle, will say, ‘So-and-so’ - naming the names written above - ‘send you 
this consecrated ring, but they say they cannot come to you because it is not 
fitting; you will experience [or test] the power of the ring, and if it does not 
have the power that you requested, they say they are prepared to come to you 



whenever you wish.’ You will take the ring, saying to him, ‘Thanks to you 
and to them.’ When you have said this, he will at once withdraw,- and you 
too shall depart from the circle, destroying it completely. 

Keep this ring with you, wrapped in a sheet of white cloth. When you wish 
to cause someone to appear dead, so that he will seem to everyone devoid of 
life, place this ring on his finger, and he will appear to be a corpse; and when 
you remove it, he will return to his former state. And when you wish a corpse 
to appear animated, place the ring as aforesaid, or bind it to a hand or foot, 
and within an hour it will arise in the form to which it is previously 
accustomed, and will speak before all with a living voice, and will be able to 
display this quality for six days, for each of these [spirits] will remain in it for 
a day. And if you wish it to be as previously before the assigned terminus, 
remove the ring. And in this manner you can revive a dead person. 

This most worthy experiment is to be kept hidden, because it holds great 
power. 

The circle given above has many powers, of which 1 shall mention three 
known to me. If you draw it on a Friday with the feather of a hoopoe and with 
its blood on a freshly prepared sheet of parchment, and touch a person with it, 
you will be loved by that person above all others forever. And if you place 
that circle, written as aforesaid, on the head of a sick person without his 
knowledge, if he is to die he will say that he can by no means recover, and if 
he is to recover he will see that he is altogether freed. And if you carry this 
circle, written in like manner, on your person, no dog will be able to bark at 
you. And I have experienced these effects; I do not mention those I have not 
experienced. 

The figure shown for this experiment is a double circular band with a pentagram 
inscribed. The names carved on the ring are repeated, along with astrological 
signs, within the two bands. The position of the master is indicated in the centre 
of the pentagram, and the cardinal directions are marked outside the bands. 

The reference to the monumentum , the white shroud, and Sunday morning 
before dawn all make it clear that this resuscitation is intended as a replication or 
perhaps a parody of Christ’s Resurrection. Yet pretending to resurrect the dead 
was one specialty associated traditionally with Antichrist. Indeed, the question 
whether Antichrist could genuinely revive the dead was much discussed in 
medieval theology. Honorius of Regensburg in his Elucidarium had his disciple 
ask whether Antichrist will truly raise the dead, to which the master replies: 


By no means; rather, the Devil by his bewitchments [ maleficiis ] will enter 
someone’s body and carry it about and speak in it, so that it will appear as if 
living, as it is said, ‘In all signs and lying wonders’ [II Thess. 2:9].— 

Hildegard of Bingen agreed that Antichrist’s miracle is an illusion, and insisted 
that ‘he is allowed to do this only occasionally, for a very short time and no 
longer, lest his presumption bring God’s glory into scorn’.- The directions in 
The Play of Antichrist say that the person resuscitated is to be a man lying in a 
coffin and feigning death in battle;- here we have pretence of death rather than 
of resurrection, but the miracle remains an illusion, just as Christian theology 
from Patristic sources onward saw magic as inherently a delusion. 

These experiments in the Munich handbook make no effort at all to dispel or 
counteract this viewpoint, but rather presuppose it, and indeed revel in it. But 
there is no sense here that the magician is trying to use his deception to seduce 
followers. His tricks are meant fundamentally as entertainment, chiefly for 
himself, perhaps, but potentially for others as well - and certainly for the reader 
who, in the privacy of his chamber, fantasizes about these wonders much as one 
might share in the fantasies of romance and related literature. 

In commenting on the allegations pressed at the Council of Pisa against 
Benedict XIII, Margaret Harvey remarks: ‘The charges ... were almost certainly 
a tissue of nonsense.... The folklore [in them] is itself interesting however, and 
so are the circumstances in which it could be delivered solemnly as fact to 
auditors at a general council by a powerful group including doctors of law and 
even a cardinal.’- One might add to this that it is not altogether anachronistic to 
see the notion of necromancy as nonsense. At its most playful, it was a deliberate 
violation of sense, a fantasy of illusion, perhaps intended more for imaginative 
entertainment than for actual use. Yet the boundaries between sense and 
nonsense are rarely quite stable, and themes that seem to an outsider absolutely 
nonsensical could be taken in deadly earnest by some observers within the 
culture. What is perhaps most fascinating about these illusionist experiments is 
precisely their teasing ambiguity, which perhaps made it possible for writers on 
witchcraft to believe about witches what they had been conditioned to believe 
just might be true of the necromancers before them. The playful fantasies of the 
necromancers, then, became sources for the Boschian nightmares of the witch 
trials. 


Notes 


1 Rawlinson MS D 252, fols 75v-76v: Quia seme[l ] eram egomet in India ab Alexandria infra horam et 
ibi mulieres videbam michi placentissimas, et statim compleui cum vna desiderium meum, nec ibi erat 
oportunitas confessorum pro tunc nisi diucius expectassem, et cum ad equum meum reuenissem stetit vbi 
coniuratus est, et cum apprendissem [76] finem freni equus incepit se mouere non permittendo me ponere 
pedem in scropam, racione mee inmundicie, et ego tenui farther frenum et equus leuauit me in aerem per 40 
pedes in altum ac tandem videns me misere periturum remisi manum et cecidi et fregi crus meum 
mirabiliter, et in India iacui per 4 menses, nec amplius vsque fueram sanus equum videbam. Cum autem 
sanus fueram, confessus eram et egi penitenciam, et parando michi cameram, feceram nouiter fieri 
sceptrum et gladium et anulum, quia anulus quern polueram virtutem perdidit. Et factis istis instruments, et 
nouiter consecratis, vocaui istos eosdem spiritus, et eundem spiritum ve\f\ equum michi feci apportari [MS 
apportaris ]. Et factis coniuracionibus eundem coniuraui et ascendebam pacifice, et per vnum mensem 
continue nisi quando descendebam ad dormiendum et comedendum vel biben- [76v] dum semper equitaui 
8cies circulando totum orbem. Et in aerem feceram eum me deuehere quousquo ego fere propter 
inpressiones aeris fueram suffocatus. Sed in circulando orbem plures [MS plrures] repperi thesauros et 
mirificos, quos postea noui in virtute docente me vno spirituum, quern postea includebam. Et sic vexaui 
equ[u]m meum, qui cum vltimate ab eo descendebam et petente me quare me lesit, respondit quod inde [sic] 
facere non potuit, dixit tamen se tarn diu cicius in inferno fore quam per tantum tempus amplius equitare. Et 
isto modo me rogauit vt amplius eum tarn diu non vexarem et ipse michi cumfuero mundus fideliter cum 
vocauero ministraret. Et sic malo pro malo retribuebam ei. 

2 De Nigromancia of Roger Bacon, iv.5, ed. and trans. Michael-Albion Macdonald (Gillette, NJ: 
Heptangle, 1988), 65-70. 

3 H.S.V. Jones, ‘The Squire’s Tale’, in W.F. Bryan and Germaine Dempster, eds, Sources and Analogues 
of Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales (New York: Humanities, 1958), 357-76. On the general theme of magical 
horses see Stith Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk-Literature: A Classification of Narrative Elements in 
Folktales, Ballads, Myths, Fables, Mediaeval Romances, Exempla, Fabliaux, Jest-Books, and Local 
Legends, rev. edn (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1955-8), B 184.1 (magic horse), D 1442.1 (magic 
bridle restrains all horses), D1626.1 (artificial flying horse), F401.3.1 (spirit in form of horse). 

4 Kathryn L. Lynch, ‘East meets West in Chaucer’s Squire’s and Franklin’s Tales’, Speculum, 70 (1995), 
530-51, esp. 539f. 

5 The Quest of the Holy Grail, trans. P.M. Matarasso (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1969), 134-61. 

6 Fols 49r-50r. 

7 Hansen, Quellen, 539-44. 

8 On illusionist magic in medieval literature see W. Eamon, ‘Technology as magic in the late Middle 
Ages and Renaissance’, Janus, 70 (1983), 171-212; Sydney H. Ball, ‘Luminous gems, mythical and real’, 
Scientific Monthly, 47 (1938), 496-505; Joan Evans, Magic Jewels of the Middle Ages and Renaissance 
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1922); Laura H. Loomis, ‘Secular dramatics in the royal palace, Paris 1378, 1389, and 
Chaucer’s “tragetoures”’, Speculum, 33 (1958), 242-55; Marvin Alpheus Owings, The Arts in the Middle 
English Romances (New York: Bookman Associates, 1952), 138-64 (‘The supernatural’); Helen Cooper, 
‘Magic that does not work’, Medievalia et Humanistica, n.s., 7 (1976), 131-46; M. Sherwood, ‘Magic and 
mechanics in medieval fiction’, Studies in Philology, 44 (1947), 567-92; Haldeen Braddy, ‘Cambyuskan’s 
flying horse and Charles Vi’s “cerf volant’”, Modern Language Review, 33 (1938), 41-4; W.A. Clouston, 
Notes on the Magical Elements in the ‘Squire’s Tale’, and Analogues (Chaucer Society, ser. 2, vol. 26) 
(London: Trubner, 1890). 

9 Anthony E. Luengo, ‘Magic and illusion in the Franklin’s Tale’, Journal of English and Germanic 
Philology, 77 (1978), 1-16; W. Bryant Bachman, Jr., “‘To maken illusion”: the philosophy of magic and the 
magic of philosophy in the Franklin's Tale’, Chaucer Review, 12 (1977), 55-67. 

10 Several early Christian writers spoke of magic as deception (fraus), delusion (elusio) or phantasm - 


which could mean purely natural sleight of hand within the capacity of any skilled human, but it could also 
apply to tricks only demons could perform, which would still be illusory in the sense that what appeared to 
be present would not in fact be. On this theme see Francis C.R. Thee, Julius Africanus and the Early 
Christian View of Magic (Tubingen: Mohr, 1984), esp. 349-52 (Irenaeus), 374-6 (Origen) and 394f. 
(Hippolytus). For a particularly well done fictional exploration of the motif see Anita Mason, The Illusionist 
(New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1984). 

11 Origen, Contra Celsum, i.68, trans. Henry Chadwick (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1953), 62-3. 

12 It would be pointless to attempt a survey of the theme in other writings, but to take merely one 
example, see Picatrix: The Latin Version of the Ghayat Al-Hakim, ed. David Pingree (London: Warburg 
Institute, 1986), 17-18. 

13 On this wide-ranging subject see, e.g., Lome Dwight Conquergood, ‘The Anglo-Saxon Boast: 
Structure and Function’ (Northwestern University dissertation, 1977), and Daniel Cliness Boughner, The 
Braggart in Renaissance Literature: A Study in Comparative Drama from Aristophanes to Shakespeare 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1954). 

14 See Joseph Hansen, Zauherwahn, Inquisition und Hexenprozefi im Mittelalter, und die Entstehung 
der grofien Hexenverfolgung (Munich: Oldenbourg, 1900; repr. Aalen: Scientia, 1964), 1-36, on the 
formation of a Sammelhegriff or Kollektivbegriff of witchcraft. 

15 Summa theologiae, i.109.1; Malleus maleficarum, i.4, trans. Montague Summers (London: Rodker, 
1928; repr. London: Pushkin, 1948), 28-31. 

16 Rossell Hope Robbins, The Encyclopedia of Witchcraft and Demonology (New York: Crown, 1959), 
420-21 (with a relevant quotation from Lancashire); Francesco Maria Guazzo, Compendium maleficarum, 
i. 12, trans. E.A. Ashwin (Secaucus, NJ: University Books, 1974), p. 37. 

17 Malleus maleficarum, ii.1.3, p. 105; cf. ii.1.1 and ii.1.4, pp. 97 and 113, in which the sign of the cross 
is said to have similar effect but outside the context of flight. A warning against the sign of the cross outside 
the context of flight occurs also in Clm 849, no. 1. 

18 W. Braekman, ‘Magische experimenten en toverpraktijken uit een middelnederlands handschriff, 
Verslagen en mededelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamse Academie voor Taal- en Letterkunde, 1966, 28-32. 

19 See Robbins, Encyclopedia of Witchcraft and Demonology, 364-7, and Richard Kieckhefer, 
European Witch Trials: Their Foundations in Popular and Learned Culture, 1300-1500 (London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul; Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976), 41-2 (and sources in the notes). 

20 I translate dapiferos thus, rather than as ‘stewards’, to convey somewhat more clearly that these 
figures actually produce the illusory banquet rather than serving at a conventional feast. 

21 This passage seems to mean that one is to draw the sword itself not only to the east but to the other 
directions while reciting the conjuration, and then again hold the sword toward the east. 

22 As I can attest from personal experience, even in the absence of demons and magicians an excited or 
agitated hoopoe flutters its crest, which otherwise lies back on its head. 

23 Oymelor, Symofos, Manoir and Faubair in the outermost band; Demefin, Rodobayl, Tamafin and 
Abelutabel in the next; Lamair, Tentetos, Leutaber and Rimasor in the next; and Masair, Lotobor, 
Tatomofon and Sirama in the innermost. (The forms of the names are exceptionally variable: Symofos 
appears elsewhere in the experiment as Symofor or Simofor, Manoir as Memoyr or Memoir, Rodobayl as 
Rodobail, Abelutabel as Selutabel or Belutabel, Leutaber as Zeugaber, Sirama as Syrama.) 

24 The spell of Pnouthis, PGM 1.42-195, in Hans Dieter Betz, ed., The Greek Magical Papyri in 
Translation, Including the Demotic Spells, 1 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), p. 6, lines 107— 
14. 

25 On the lore of this bird see John Gotthold Kunstmann, ‘The Hoopoe: A Study in European Fo lk lore’ 


(University of Chicago dissertation, 1938); W.R. Dawson, ‘The lore of the hoopoe’, Ibis, ser. 12, 1 (1925), 
31-9; Sarnia A1 Azharia Jahn, ‘Zur Volkskunde eines Zugvogels: Der Wiedehopf ( Upupa Epops L.) in 
Nordeuropa und in den islamischen Landern Afrikas’, Anthropos, 76 (1981), 371-92; and R. Lops, ‘La 
huppe: histoire litteraire et legendaire d’un oiseau’, in Q. Mok, et al, eds, Melanges de linguistique, de 
litterature et de philologie offerts a J.R. Smeets (Leiden, 1982), 171-85. For some of these references I am 
indebted to Baudouin van den Abeele. Albert the Great, Man and the Beasts: De animalibus (Books 22-26), 
xxiii.112, trans. James J. Scanlan (Binghamton, NY: CEMERS, 1987), 321, reports that smearing hoopoe 
blood on the temples before sleeping causes nightmares, and that enchanters seek the bird’s organs 
(especially its brain, tongue and heart) for ‘their own purposes’. See also Betz, The Greek Magical Papyri, 
1, pp. 13 (PGM II. 1-64), 29 (III.424-66), 129 (VII.411-16), and 210 (PDM xiv.116). 

26 Prospero, in Shakespeare’s Tempest , IV.i. 

27 For experiencia, although the heading gives experimenta. 

28 A largely conjectural reading of qui habet multum ipsos 15 demones pauentare uel spanentare; the 
writer seems to have been copying from a source and unable to determine what the verb should be. 

29 The MS reads recedetis, but the context calls for redeatis or the equivalent. 

30 This translation simplifies and clarifies a somewhat confused passage. 

31 P.M. Matarasso, trans. The Quest of the Holy Grail (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1969), 192-94. 

32 Lobsang P. Lhalungpa, trans. The Life ofMilarepa (Boston and London: Shambhala, 1985), 52. 

33 On the relationship in medieval Europe, see my article, ‘The holy and the unholy: sainthood, 
witchcraft, and magic in late medieval Europe’, Journal of Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 24 (1994), 
355-85, reprinted in Scott L. Waugh and Peter D. Diehl, eds, Christendom and its Discontents: Exclusion, 
Persecution, and Rebellion, 1000-1500 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 310-37. The 
information about modem lamas was related to me by Janet Gyatso. 

34 See also Frederic C. Tubach, Index exemplorum: A Handbook of Medieval Religious Tales (FF 
Communications, 204) (Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, Akademia Scientiamm Fennica, 1969), 245, 
nos 3,130 and 3,134, and the Malleus maleficarum, ii.1.3. 

35 Chs 31-2. 

36 Or perhaps ‘with a farewell’ ( cum salute). 

37 For de cuius cluni[bu]s aliquantulum incidere debes. 

38 The nomenclature is again variable: Lantrayth appears also as Lautrayth and Lutrayth, Feremni as 
Feremin and Feremim, Oliromim as Oliroomim. 

39 The classic source is Plato’s Republic, book 2, 359d-360c. For medieval versions of the tale see 
Tubach, Index exemplorum, 189, no. 2,391. For other examples of using rings for invisibility see Betz, 
Greek Magical Papyri, 1, pp. 136 (VII.628-42) and 109 (V.447-58). 

40 Albertus Magnus, The Book of Secrets of Albertus Magnus, of the Virtues of Herbs, Stones and 
Certain Beasts, also A Book of the Marvels of the World, ed. Michael R. Best and Frank H. Brightman 
(Oxford: Clarendon, 1973), 26f. The assumption was that the brilliant luminosity of the stone would bl in d 
people to one’s presence; on the general subject of luminous stones, see Sydney H. Ball, ‘Luminous gems, 
mythical and real’, Scientific Monthly, 47 (1938), 496-505; and Joan Evans, Magic Jewels of the Middle 
Ages and Renaissance (Oxford: Clarendon, 1922). 

44 Perhaps the closest classical analogue to this procedure is from the Greek magical papyri, which 
recommend holding a snapdragon under the tongue while sleeping, and reciting specified names on rising 
early, to become invisible; see Betz, Greek Magical Papyri, 1, p. 135 (PGM VII.619-27, from a collection 
called the Diadem of Moses). See also an Italian experiment for invisibility mentioned by Charles Burnett in 
Magic and Divination in the Middle Ages: Texts and Techniques in the Islamic and Christian Worlds 
(Aldershot: Variorum, 1996), IX, pp. 6-7, where five beans are placed in a woman’s skull and buried. 


42 For a survey of relevant sources see Robbins, Encyclopedia of Witchcraft and Demonology, 159-60. 

43 Fols 66v-67v. 

44 The MS uses the second person, but the reference is clearly to the horseman. 

45 Elucidarium, iii. 10, in Patrologia latina, 172, col. 1163. See Linus Urban Lucken, Antichrist and the 
Prophets of Antichrist in the Chester Cycle (Washington: Catholic University of America Press, 1940), 63- 
5. On Antichrist generally see Bernard McGinn, Antichrist: Two Thousand Years of the Human Fascination 
with Evil (San Francisco: Harper, 1994). See also Nancy Caciola, ‘Wraiths, revenants and ritual in medieval 
culture’, Past & Present, 152 (August 1996), 3M5. 

46 Hildegard of Bingen, Scivias, xi.27, trans. Mother Columba Hart and Jane Bishop (New York: 
Paulist, 1990), 503. 

47 The Play of Antichrist, trans. John Wright (Toronto: Pontifical Institute of Mediaeval Studies, 1967), 
89f. 

48 Margaret Harvey, ‘Papal witchcraft: the charges against Benedict XIII’, in Derek Baker, ed., Sanctity 
and Secularity: The Church and the World (Oxford: Blackwell, 1973), 109. 


4 


Love, Favour and Madness: Psychological 

Experiments 

W hen we speak of one individual as ‘charming’ or ‘fascinating’ another, we 
still use the traditional language of magic to suggest the power that 
personalities can exert over each other. We know that the human mind is 
subject to subtle and often threatening or frightening influence; it comes as no 
surprise that practitioners of magic have claimed to make such influence into a 
kind of science available for their employment. Nor is it surprising if at times 
magic intended to bend the minds and wills of other persons has its desired 
effect, since this form of magic more than any other lends itself to the power of 
suggestion. 1 Outside the context of clerical necromancy, magic of this sort 
occurs in trials such as that of Matteuccia di Francesco at Todi in 1428. Among 
the many charges against Matteuccia was this: 

... in the month of December of 1427 a certain woman of that territory went 
to Matteuccia and, after confessing that she loved a certain man, said that she 
would like to spread her hatred so that her man would abandon his wife and, 
loving only herself, do everything she wanted. Matteuccia told the woman to 
wash her hands and feet facing backwards and with her knees bent and when 
she had done so to take the water and throw it where the man and woman 
were going to pass, with the spirit, intent and belief that this would generate 
hatred between them. The woman did this and reported to Matteuccia that the 
water had generated hatred between the man and the woman as she had 
intended, so that they could not meet, but instead hated each other. 2 

The alienation of affection in this case is more than usually complicated: the 
same ritual simultaneously disrupted the married couple’s relationship and 
bound the husband’s affections, causing him to love the client so intensely that 
he complied with her every wish. In other cases Matteuccia prescribed such 
water rituals as a means for regaining affection and for transferring disease, 


presumably on the assumption that the fluidity of water made it a fitting symbol 
and medium for emotional instability, but also perhaps implying that the sort of 
water one might expect to find in a medieval city could plausibly be viewed as a 
means for contamination and contagion. 

Psychological magic in the Munich handbook 

The Munich manuscript contains seven experiments that might be termed 
psychological, because they are intended to influence people’s minds or wills: to 
cause madness or hatred, to gain favour with a potentate, to constrain the will of 
others, or to arouse the love of a woman. Five general features characterize these 
experiments. First, they typically involve elaborate preparation and ceremonies 
which may require more than one day. Second, the purposes and forms (other 
than the conjurations) have much in common with those of astral magic. Third, 
the basic techniques are those of ‘sympathetic’ or ‘imitative’ magic, whose 
meaning is explicated by accompanying incantations; magic circles either are not 
used or are simple and relatively unimportant, and conjurations are less 
significant and elaborate here than in other forms of necromancy. Fourth, the 
procedures and the expected results are typically more violent than in other 
experiments, amounting in the erotic experiments to a kind of rape. Fifth, with 
rare exceptions, the magician works strictly by himself, in secret, without 
companions (unless one includes the women he sets out to seduce, in erotic 
forms of this magic); whereas the secrecy in illusionist experiments adds to the 
sense of excitement and adventure, the point here is more simply to evade 
detection in circumstances that would be extremely damaging. 

