SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 23/39  |  CHARS: 528148-552806 of 925451
============================================================

ed for his skill in 
necromancy agrees to conjure demons to persuade a knight who does not believe 


in them. The cleric inscribes a circle on the ground at a crossroads, and warns 
the knight that he must remain within the circle as protection from the demons, 
and within this protective confine the knight remains secure (albeit terrified) 
when demons and the Devil himself arrive. In another exemplum, individuals 
who dare to step outside the circle are immediately attacked by the fiends.- 

This notion of the magic circle as a protective device occurs at times in the 
magicians’ own writings. In the Rawlinson necromantic manuscript the spirits 
are commanded to approach the master ‘beside the circle here inscribed’ (iuxta 
circulum hie circumscriptum). Elsewhere the spirits are commanded to come to 
the ‘place and circle’ (locum et circulum) ordained for their appearance. The 
master is to ‘sign’ or bless the circle with his rod, saying ‘I make this circle in 
honour of the Holy Trinity, that [it] may be for him and his companions a place 
of protection and a refuge which the demons cannot violate, enter, defile, touch, 
or even fly over; they must appear in a place designated for them outside the 
circle.’- The notion of the circle as a protective device is found again in an early 
sixteenth-century text pseudonymously ascribed to Cornelius Agrippa.- But it is 
probably not the magicians’ original understanding of how the magic circle 
functioned. The circle as a locus of power, enhancing the power of the operator, 
is ancient; it appears, for example, in the early Jewish story of Honi the Circle- 
Drawer and in the Greek magical papyri.- The further notion that the circle 
protects the magician from demons may well have originated with moralists 
such as Caesarius, as a symbolic way of talking about how hazardous it is to 
conjure demons, even if it was eventually taken over by the necromancers 
themselves. 

In the Munich handbook it is clear that the circle is a focus of power meant to 
gain control over spirits. The circles have power to convoke the demons (no. 9) 
and to terrify them (no. 7). In one case the circle is identified as the insignia of 
the spirits being conjured (no. 8). In another experiment the circle seems to be 
identified as a representation of the spirits’ dwelling place (no. 7). Apart from its 
power over spirits, a circle may be inscribed on horsehide, and then it will exert 
power over any horses to whom it is displayed, or keep unwanted horses from 
approaching its bearer (no. 9). At one point it is said that the spirits cannot enter 
a circle (no. 3), but elsewhere they are said in fact to do so (no. 11). The 
instructions for conjuring Mirage in the supplementary sections of the codex do 
suggest that the circle has a protective function, more for the magician’s 
companion than for the master himself: the master makes a circle with a knife 
and has his companion sit inside it, carefully instructing him not to stretch hand, 


foot, clothes or hair outside it until all is done, ‘lest through some error he should 
seem to enter into danger’.- The role of the circle in one of the manual’s erotic 
experiments (no. 3) is ambiguous: it is clearly a focus of magical power, and it 
may also play a protective role. The text says that the larger the circle, the better; 
if anything of the master’s should extend beyond the circle, ‘it would be bad for 
you’. Does this imply that the circle is a protective enclosure against the assaults 
of the demons? Perhaps, but this function is not clearly expressed. At no point 
does the author expressly state that the demons may cause harm and that the 
circle is necessary for protection; indeed, the experiment is explicitly said to be 
without danger. While the master sports with the woman inside his capacious 
circle the demons have in fact vanished; there is no sense that they remain as 
invisible yet menacing presences. The master’s greatest fear may be not assault 
but interruption: having gone to such effort to secure the woman’s presence and 
guard the secrecy of his magic, he does not want to be disturbed in his 
lovemaking by forces demonic or otherwise, and the circle provides an enclosure 
within which his privacy is secure. Exceeding the bounds of this enclosure will 
probably have the worst result he envisions: the spell will be broken and he will 
be disappointed in his love. 


Astral magic 

Magic circles are not explicitly linked with the celestial spheres, at least in the 
Munich handbook, yet the magic of circles and that involving heavenly bodies 
are perhaps related, at least indirectly. In each case the circular form - the perfect 
shape, according to ancient Greek thought - was conceived as a centre of power 
that radiated outward. The elegance of the simple form, made with a single and 
uniform line, seems to have been suggestive of inward-looking strength 
combined with maximal power to influence other beings. Even if the magic 
circle could also serve as a protective boundary, defining a safe space within 
itself, the Munich handbook makes it clear that the circle exerted force over 
demons, whether traced on the ground or transferred to a sheet of parchment. 
More clearly and perhaps more obviously, in medieval thought, the stars and 
planets emitted powers that affected life on earth and could be put to use by a 
magician for good or for ill. The possibility of such astral magic was not merely 
a belief of the magicians themselves; philosophers and theologians, indeed 
educated people generally, accepted the premise that the heavenly bodies 
influenced affairs here below.- 


In 1441 Eleanor Cobham, the Duchess of Bedford, was tried for treasonous 
magic along with accomplices who included Roger Bolingbroke. His part in the 
matter is summarized by one contemporary source in these terms: 

And a certain clerk, one of the most renowned in all the world in astronomy 
and the magical art, master Roger Bolingbroke, was arrested, and publicly in 
the cemetery of St Paul’s, with the vestments of his magic and with waxen 
images, and with many other magical instruments, he sat in a certain high 
throne, so that people from everywhere might see his works; afterwards he 
was hanged, drawn and quartered, and his head placed on London Bridge. 
This master Roger was one of the most notable clerks in the whole world, and 
he was accused on account of ... Lady Elianora [Cobham], to whom he was 
an advisor in the magic art, and after his death many lamented exceedingly 
greatly. 

Lor our purposes it is not necessary to explore all details and implications of the 
affair.- Suffice it to point out that this Bolingbroke clearly was an ‘astronomer’ 
or astrologer, and surely had cast the horoscope of Henry VI, already an activity 
that smacked of treason, but whether he had actually compassed the monarch’s 
demise is another matter. In any case, we have here a classic case of the 
intersection between astrology, astral magic and necromancy. Whether or not 
this particular astrologer was also a necromancer, to lend further force to its 
conjurations necromancy clearly did borrow techniques, however superficially, 
from the traditions of astral magic derived from Arabic treatises such as Picatrix. 
This and similar writings had been translated from Arabic into Western 
European languages in and around the thirteenth century and seem to have had 
profound influence on necromantic practice. This influence manifests itself in 
the Munich manual chiefly in instructions to observe certain astrological 
conditions and in the use of fumigations. 

In various ways the magical apparatus contained in the Munich manual draws 
from the tradition of astral magic. Eleven experiments specify that their 
operations, or certain of them, should be done under specified astrological 
conditions, which most often entail phases of the moon: the work should be done 
under a waxing or waning moon, or in a particular phase of the moon. The day 
of the week is sometimes specified. The time of the day may be indicated: the 
first hour, before sunrise, morning or noon. Thus, an erotic experiment (no. 12) 
must be initiated in the hour of Venus or the hour of Jove, not simply because of 


the obvious erotic associations of Venus, but because Venus and Jupiter were 
seen as ‘favourable’ planets. At times the manual says that operations should be 
carried out under a clear sky. Astrological specifications of slightly greater 
sophistication occur only rarely: an experiment is to be carried out under a 
conjunction of Venus and Jupiter, or when the Sun is in Leo.- 

Fumigations (or suffumigations) occur in eight of the manual’s experiments. 
In psychological experiments it is the image or the object sympathetically 
representing the victim that is fumigated: with myrrh and saffron (no. 3); with 
cinnamon, pepper and agrimonia (no. 4), or with sulphur fumes (no. 5). In 
illusionist experiments it is the circle that is thus treated: with the marrow of a 
dead person (no. 8), or with incense and myrrh (no. 11). An all-purpose 
experiment (no. 36) likewise instructs the master to place incense and myrrh in a 
thurible (presumably of gold) and walk around the outer edge of the circle, 
saying, ‘I make this fumigation in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of 
the Holy Spirit. ’ Both versions of the Mirror of Floron require that the mirror 
itself be fumigated. 

The portion of the manual most fully reflecting the influence of Arabic astral 
magic is the compendium devoted specifically to the subject (no. 37). This 
section of the manuscript, which is deeply indebted to works such as Picatrix 
and other manuals of astral magic, 22 contains two types of material: integrated 
instructions for magical rites utilizing the powers of the heavenly bodies, and 
lists of supplementary information regarding each day of the week (the seals to 
be used, the names of angels and other spirits who rule and serve on each day, 
suffumigations to be employed) and each hour of the day and night (the name 
and function of each, names of angels that rule each hour, images to be used for 
each hour, and so forth).- The latter form of material can perhaps best be 
conveyed in tabular form (see Tables E-G), even if some nuance is lost in this 
presentation. Those subsections which give integrated instructions for rites are, 
in particular, no. 37a (conjurations for each day of the week), nos 37m and 37n 
(uses of images for each day and night hour), and no. 37q (uses of images and 
conjurations for each day of the week). 

Two examples (one from no. 37m, the other from no. 37q) will illustrate how 
the integrated experiments draw upon the schemata found in the mere lists: 

During the fifth day hour one should make an image to tame wild beasts, such 
as lions, bears, wolves, and any other wild and harmful beasts. At this hour 
cast an image of the animal of the sort you wish to control or tame, and on the 


head of the image carve the name of the animal, and on the chest the name of 
the hour and the name of the lord of the hour, and on the stomach the seven 
names of the first hour, and fumigate the image with Indian wood and with 
red sandalwood, and bury the image in a place of your choosing, and with the 
Lord’s help aiding you, you will see that all those animals will be turned to 
your will. 

Somewhat more elaborate is a procedure for bringing concord between humans: 

The fifth image is that of Thursday, and the angels constituted over it are 
Satquiel, Pattar, Constiel, [and] Assassayel, and these are the winds 
constituted over the image: Silite, Maraben, Halharit, and their helpers are 
Yse, Riron, Naasay, [and] Eladab. And when you wish to perform this work, 
make an image of yellow bronze or of yellow wax on a Thursday, and tint it 
with green, and make it for a man [or] for a woman, if you wish thereby to 
bring friendship between two men or women, or between a man and a 
woman. Make two images of green wax in the month of May, at the height of 
Pisces, or in the month of January in the height of Sagittarius, and write the 
name of the man on the heart of the woman’s image, and the name of the 
woman on the heart of the male, and say this conjuration: 

‘O Lord God, almighty creator of [all] things, visible and invisible, 
establish gentle concord between thus-and-such woman, daughter of so-and- 
so, and so-and-so, son of so-and-so, such as you established between Adam 
and Eve, and between Jacob and Rachel, and between Michael and Gabriel 
(one of whom is fiery and the other watery, [yet] the one does not harm the 
other, but there is great concord between them), and such concord as you 
established between the angel whose medium is fire and the one whose 
medium is snow, so that the snow does not extinguish the fire, nor does the 
fire consume the snow, and so you likewise turn envy into concord. Thus, O 
Lord, by your most holy kindness and mercy, may you cause so-and-so, 
daughter of so-and-so, to accord with, to love, and to cherish so-and-so, son 
of so-and-so. I conjure you angels by the name Yafaa, Safaa, Alleya, Hayala, 
Haya, Halix, Hayul, Ataya, Hytoia, Saffetaba, Coffossol, Remlestar, El, Lord 
God, you who know the secrets of [all] hearts and are the end and the 
beginning, [and] who never die. Hasten, Sarafem [and] Custyeli, and 
command Amaris and his helpers, that they may quickly carry out and 
accomplish my request.’ 



And bury the image in a place by which they pass, and you will see the 

marvels of almighty God. 

No. 37a consists chiefly of conjurations for the days of the week; the 
conjurations differ in two main ways from those found in the main block of 
material: their purpose is left unspecified, there being no explicit instruction to 
the spirits conjured; and they involve word play and near repetition of a sort 
often associated with Kabbalah: ‘In the name Adonay, Adonay, Eye, Eye, Eyu 
... Eye, Aloraye; in the name Sadaye, Saday, Cados, Cados, Cados, the high one, 
sitting upon the cherubim ... ’; ‘In the name Adonay, Adonay, Adonay, Eye, Eye, 
Eye, Cados, Cados, Cados, Hatyn, Hatyn, Hatyn, Va, Va, strong one, Va, who 
appeared on Mount Sinai with glorification of his reign, Ya, Adonay, Saday, 
Sabaoth, Hanath, Hu, Haxi, Ya, Ya, Ya, Marmalita, Abym, Yea ...’; and ‘by the 
name Ya, Ya, Ya, A, A, Va, Hy, Hy, Haa, Haai, Va, Va, Han, Han, Hon, Hy, 
Hyen, Haya, Haya, Hoi, Hoi, Hay, Hael, Hon; by the names of the Lord Adonay, 
Haya, Hoi, creator of the ages, Cados, Cados, Cados, Ebel, El, Ya, Ya, Ya, Eloy, 
Arar, Eloym, Eloym ... ’ 

Elements of simple lunar astrology, too, are found toward the end of the 
compilation, in a listing of what were called lunationes, or days of the lunar 
cycle that are good or bad for making magical inscriptions (no. 46). In general, 
lunar astrology lent itself more to popular use than did the more technical 
science of solar astrology; while it is found in varying degrees of complexity, it 
could easily be reduced to a simple list of days in the lunar cycle, identified as 
favourable or unfavourable, whether in general or for a particular operation such 
as the working of magic. - 

When all is said and done, however, the use of astrology and astral magic in 
the Munich handbook - and probably in other, similar necromantic texts - is 
fairly superficial. One does not find detailed or rationalized efforts to exploit the 
powers of celestial bodies, and even the concise treatise of astral magic is more a 
catalogue than a fully developed work, presumably included simply because the 
compiler was highly eclectic, but not genuinely integrated into the drift of the 
compilation as a whole. 

The Speculum astronomiae, probably written by Albert the Great, explains 
the basic principles of astrology, then touches at the end on necromancy and 
related arts. The author says he does not mean to speak in favour of astrological 
images, because of their similarity to necromantic (necromanticas) ones. He then 
goes on to say that necromantic books should be set aside without being 


destroyed, ‘For perhaps the time is already at hand, when, for certain reasons 
about which I am now silent, it will be useful on occasion to have inspected 
them, but, nevertheless, their inspectors should be wary of using them.’- Coy as 
it is, this statement makes clear that the boundary between astral magic and 
necromancy was fluid in practice even if in theory it could be stated with clarity: 
astral magic invoked the natural powers of the stars and planets, while 
necromancy called upon demons; but if there were spirits associated with the 
heavenly bodies, these might be difficult to distinguish from the spirits of the air 
traditionally conceived as demonic.- One can well understand why orthodox 
authorities and writers would be suspicious of that which even bordered on the 
forbidden. The works translated from the Arabic might include a great deal of 
material that was straightforwardly astrological and clearly non-demonic, but a 
work such as Picatrix appealed to both the powers of the planets and those of 
spirits, and identified its art as that of necromancy. The Munich handbook is 
important in part because it extends the spectrum to the furthest extreme, giving 
us nearly in its entirety a work expressly devoted to demonic magic, worked out 
in considerable detail and for the most part with only token borrowing from the 
astral magic with which necromancy was so richly intertwined. 


Table E . Specifications for each day of the week 



Purposes (37g) Images (37 q) 


Angels serving Spirits ruling Suffumi- 

(37a, 37b, (and co- gations (37f) 

37d,cf.37h) adjutors) (37e) 


Sun. 

Raphael 

King Saytam 
(Taatus, 
Candas, 
Vanibal) 

yellow or 
red 

sandalwood 

binding 

tongues 

otherwise 

binding 

people 

gold or yellow 
wax, for binding 
tongues 

Mon. 

Gabriel 

King 

Almodab 

(Sylol, 

Millalu, 

Abuzaba) 

aloes, 

anacap 

benevolence, 

concord, 

friendship 

gold or steel or 
white wax, for 
concord 

Tues. 

Samael 

‘rex films 

dyabuli 

(Carmath, 

Utanaual, 

Pascami) 

pepper, 

abana, 

9>g 

illness and 
destruction 

red copper or 
red wax, for 
depopulating 
a house, causing 
bloodshed or 
illness, or other 
harm 

Wed. 

Michael 

King Saba 
(Conas, 

Pactas, 

Sanbras) 

a llast 

enmity and 
hatred 

lead, for enmity 

Thurs. 

Satquiel 

Madrath, 
son of Arath 
(Hyrti, Ignaro 
Quiron, 
Saalalebeth) 

yellow 

incense 

peace 

yellow copper or 
yellow wax, for 
concord between 
man and woman 

Fri. 

Anael 

King 

Saabotes 

(Nassath, 

Ynasa) 

almastic or 
lignum radim 

friendship 

white wax, for 
love of a woman 

Sat. 

Captiel= 

Caffriel 

Hay ton, 

Assayby 

(Abimalyb, 

Haybalydoth, 

Yfla) 

assandaron , 

sulphur 

binding 

locations 

pix clara , for 
binding tongues 
or places, for 
discord 




Table F . Specifications for day hours 



Names 

(37j) 

Functions (37j) 

Ruling 
angels (371) 

Functions of images 
(37 m) 

1st 

Yayn 

binding tongues 

Raphael 

binding tongues 

2nd 

Yan, Or 

friendship, favour of 
potentates 

Anael 

benevolence 

3rd 

Nassura 

hunting, fishing 

Michael 

congregating birds and 
fish 

4th 

Sala 

binding wild beasts 

Gabriel 

dispelling beasts 

5th 

Sadadat 

binding beasts 

Gafl'riel 

taming wild beasts 

6th 

Tamhut 

freeing captives 

Salquiel 

freeing captives 

7th 

Caror 

peace between kings 

Samael 

hunting and fishing 

8th 

Tariel 

discord 

Raphael 

destroying houses and 
other places 

9th 

Karon 

travel, safe passage 
among robbers 

Anael 

travelling without harm 

10th Hyon 

work with demons 
or demoniacs, foul 
wind, aid to ladies 

Michael 

obtaining one’s will with 
kings and princes 

11 th Nathalon 

causing bleeding in 
women, binding men to 
women and vice versa 

Gabriel 

concord 

12th 

Abat 

peace (between men 
and women) 

Gafriel 

binding tongues 


Table G . Specifications for night hours 







Names 

Functions (37k) 

Ruling 

Images (37n) 


(37k) 


angels (371) 


1st 

Leron 

working with 
demoniacs, foul winds 

Satquiel 

illuminating dark places 

2nd 

Latol 

working with fish 

Samael 

knowing fortunes 

3rd 

Hami 

working with fire 

Raphael 

dispelling reptiles 

4th 

Atyn 

destroying houses, 

Anael 

destroying or 



expelling people 


depopulating villages, 
causing enmity 

5 th 

Caron 

asking questions of 
sleepers 

Michael 

scattering armies 

6th 

Zaia 

working with fruit trees 
and other plants 

Gabriel 

putting enemies to flight 

7th 

Nectius 

expelling people, causing 
sickness and death 

Cafriel 

burning vegetation 

8th 

Tafat 

causing enmity 

Satquiel 

gathering bees or birds 

9th 

Conassuor 

binding tongues, 

Samael 

attracting and capturing 



entering before kinds 
and lords 


birds 

10th Algo 

destroying evil speech 

Raphael 

scattering besieging 



or thought 


armies 

11 th Caltrua 

binding or catching birds 

Anael 

Not to be used for 





making images 

12th Salaij 

telling fortunes, disclosing 





theft or other crime 

Michael 



Notes 

1 Siegfried Wenzel, ed. and trans., Fasciculus morum: A Fourteenth-Century Preacher’s Handbook 
(University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1989), v. 30, pp. 578-79. 

2 Guillaume de Deguileville, The Pilgrimage of the Life of Man, Englisht by John Lydgate, A.D. 1426, 
from the French of Guillaume de Deguileville, A.D. 1330, 1355, ed. F.J. Fumivall (London: K. Paul, Trench, 
Triibner, 1899-1904), vol. 2, pp. 493-505, lines 18,471-924. See Richard Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle 
Ages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 172-3, where the drawing of the meeting with the 
necromancer is reproduced. 

3 M.R. James, ‘Twelve medieval ghost-stories’, English Historical Review, 37 (1922), 416f. 

4 Hansen, Quellen, 556-9; Bibliotheque de l Ecole des Chartes, ser. 2, vol. 3 (1846). 

5 A classic Byzantine treatise on magic instructed its reader to make two concentric circles wide enough 




to accommodate two people; they should be drawn inside a square, with an entrance corridor to the south, 
and various words and signs are to be inscribed. See Richard RH. Greenfield, Traditions of Belief in Late 
Byzantine Demonology (Amsterdam: Hakkert, 1988), 286-7. 

6 The Sworn Book of Honourius [sic] the Magician, as Composed by Honourius through Counsel with 
the Angel Hocroell, ed. and trans. Daniel J. Driscoll (Gillette, NJ: Heptangle, 1983), chs 26 and 38. 

7 De Nigromancia of Roger Bacon, ii.4-6, ed. and trans. Michael-Albion Macdonald (Gillette, NJ: 
Heptangle, 1988), 13-26. On the legend of St Cyprian of Antioch see Butler’s Lives of the Saints, ed. 
Herbert Thurston and Donald Attwater (New York: Kenedy, 1956), under 26 September. 

8 De Nigromancia., iii.l, 28f. 

9 Ibid., 51. 

10 Rawl. 29r, 73r, 77v-78r, 79r, 103v, 104v. 

11 One (nos 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 12, 15), two (nos 7, 10, 16, 18, 22), three (nos 36, two in 39, 40), or four (no. 

6 ). 

12 For parallels and possible sources in Arabic culture see H.A. Winkler, Siegel und Charaktere in der 
muhammedanischen Zauberei (Berlin and Leipzig: de Gruyter, 1930). 

J_3 E.g., Greenfield, Traditions of Belief, 286. 

14 Caesarius of Heisterbach, The Dialogue on Miracles, trans. H. von E. Scott and C.C. Swinton Bland, 
vol. 1 (London: Routledge, 1929), 315-17. See also Stith Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk-Literature: A 
Classification of Narrative Elements in Folktales, Ballads, Myths, Fables, Mediaeval Romances, Exempla, 
Fabliaux, Jest-Books, and Local Legends, rev. edn (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1955-58), nos. 
D1272 (magic circle), D1381.ll (magic circle protects from devil) and G303.16.19.15 (devil cannot enter 
magic circle made to keep him out); and Frederic C. Tubach, Index exemplorum: A Handbook of Medie\>al 
Religious Tales (FF Communications, 204) (Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, Akademia Scientiarum 
Fennica, 1969), p. 86, nos. 1,069-71. 

15 Bodleian Library, Oxford, Rawlinson MS 252, fols 25v, 59v-61v. 

16 Cornelius Agrippa, Of Occidt Philosophy, Book Four: Magical Ceremonies, ed. and trans. Robert 
Turner (Gillette, NJ: Heptangle, 1985), 72. 

17 Taanith, 3.8, in C.K. Barrett, New Testament Background: Selected Documents (London: SPCK, 
1956; rev. edn 1987), pp. 191-2; and Hans Dieter Betz, ed., The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation, 
Including the Demotic Spells, 1 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), 141 (PGM VII.846-61), 73 
(IV.2006-2125). 

