SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 10/39  |  CHARS: 215562-239982 of 925451
============================================================

lts are typically more violent than in other 
experiments, amounting in the erotic experiments to a kind of rape. Fifth, with 
rare exceptions, the magician works strictly by himself, in secret, without 
companions (unless one includes the women he sets out to seduce, in erotic 
forms of this magic); whereas the secrecy in illusionist experiments adds to the 
sense of excitement and adventure, the point here is more simply to evade 
detection in circumstances that would be extremely damaging. 

The preparation and ritual is sometimes protracted over several days (nos 2, 
4, 5), or at least involves multiple operations performed on a single occasion 
(nos 3, 12, 13, 35). One is tempted to speculate that such magic can best take 
effect if its victims are aware that it is being used and if they are liable to the 
power of suggestion, and that the more elaborate the procedures, the greater the 
chance that the intended victims will learn the fate that is to befall them. Indeed, 
in one of these experiments (no. 2) the master is instructed to go to the victim 
and warn him in advance of his fate. John Gager suggests in a similar context 
that magicians may have been ‘less than totally discreet about their business, 
perhaps intentionally so, and let it be known that a “fix” had been put on so-and- 
so’.- Such deliberate indiscretion would be especially appropriate for magic that 
depended entirely on psychological effect. 


The purposes served by these psychological experiments are among the most 
common purposes found in the astral magic translated into Latin from Arabic 
sources such as Picatrix and Thabit ibn Qurra’s De imaginibus.- Thabit’s treatise 
is devoted to experiments for such goals as destroying a city or region, becoming 
ruler of a place, securing the favour of a king, and arousing friendship or enmity 
between two persons. The magician is in every case expected to use images, not 
so much as aids to sympathetic magic, but as channels of astrological power; the 
astrological conditions for use of these images are thus of paramount 
importance. The psychological experiments in the Munich handbook are 
generally much longer and more fully developed than the materials in these 
Arabic sources. What they add are chiefly conjurations and operations of 
sympathetic magic. 

These rituals consistently entail sympathetic procedures: they rely on the 
basic principle of sympathetic magic, sicut hie, ita illic. More often than not the 
master is supposed to inflict some kind of violence upon the victim’s image, so 
that a corresponding violence will occur to the actual victim. In other words, 
ritual rape is a means for accomplishing physical rape. A representative object 
may be consumed or destroyed: a candle melted (no. 2); stones beaten together, 
buried, heated and crushed (no. 5); an image pierced with needles (no. 12); a 
bone placed in fire (nos 13 and 35). Elsewhere the representative object is used 
for an imitative operation symbolizing submission: one metal image is placed in 
a position of subordination to another (no. 4). The specifically demonic or 
necromantic element in these experiments is typically an appendage to this 
sympathetic magic, and the demons generally play a less prominent role than in 
illusionist or divinatory experiments. Other features of necromancy, while 
present, are also relegated to a position of secondary significance. The 
conjurations used in these experiments tend to be relatively simple. Instead of 
conjurations, incantations explicating the significance of the sympathetic ritual 
(‘Just as ... so too ...’) occupy a central position. Even the magic circles called 
for in these experiments are comparatively simple: indeed, in three cases there 
are no circles at all (nos 4, 5, 35), and in four others there is either a simple circle 
(nos 2, 3, 12) or a simple shield-figure substituting for a circle (no. 13). 

Experiments to inflict harm 

Later medieval books of magic are seldom shy about giving straightforwardly 
harmful formulas. A fifteenth-century Liber de angelis, annulis, karecteribus et 


ymaginibus planetarum (Book of angels, rings, characters, and images of the 
planets) in the Cambridge University Library contains an experiment called the 
Vindicta Troie (Vengeance of Troy), which can be used to arouse hatred or to 
cause bodily harm or even death. The procedure calls for making an image on 
the day and in the hour of Saturn, in the name of the person to be harmed. The 
image must be made of wax, preferably from candles used at a funeral. It should 
be made as ugly as possible; the face should be contorted, and there should be 
hands in place of feet and vice versa. The victim’s name should be inscribed on 
the forehead of the image, the name of the planet Saturn on its breast, and the 
seals or characters of Saturn between its shoulders. The operator should call 
upon the spirits of Saturn to descend from on high and afflict the named victim. 
The image should be fumigated with various substances, including human bones 
and hair, then wrapped in a funeral cloth and buried in some unclean place, face 
downward. If the magician wishes to harm any particular member of the victim’s 
body, there are instructions for binding the corresponding member on the image 
with a funeral cloth and piercing the image with a needle; to kill the victim, the 
magician should insert the needle into the spine, from the head down to the 
heart. To cure the victim afterward (unless, presumably, the experiment has 
succeeded in killing him), one must unbury the image, remove the needle and 
anoint the wounds that are left, rub out the inscriptions, and wash the image in a 
fountain. The Liber de angelis also prescribes a technique for arousing discord: 
the operator makes one image of Saturn and another of Mars (which counted as 
‘unfortunate’ planets), one holding a lance and the other a sword, and buries 
them positioned over against each other.- 

If one were to judge from the trial records, one might suppose that 
necromancy was used chiefly to bring personal harm and death to enemies. 
Thus, Guichard of Troyes was charged in the early fourteenth century with 
hiring a witch and a friar to kill the queen of France by image magic and 
invocation of demons,- and in 1441 Eleanor Cobham was accused of employing 
a witch and two scholars learned in astrology and necromancy, in part to kill the 
king of England, 2 to cite only two examples. Yet of all the experiments in the 
Munich manual, only two (nos 2 and 5), are designed specifically and 
exclusively to cause harm, and the damage is specifically psychological; the 
manuscript contains no experiments for killing enemies or inflicting physical 
harm on them. Even these two experiments designed to bring harm provide 
countermagic for the master to use if he wishes to undo his own mischief (as 
does the Liber de angelis ). 


Let us look first at an experiment designed to bring enmity between two 
friends (no. 5): 

When you wish to sow hatred and mortal enmity between two men or 
women, or a man and a woman, you must take two shiny round rocks from a 
river. 2 On one you must carve the name of one person, with the names 
Cartutay, Momabel, Sobil and Geteritacon. On the other [you must carve] the 
name of the other person and the names Puzanil, Pimaton, Folfitoy, and 
Mansator. These names are highly antipathetic to each other. When they are 
carved, you must bury one under the threshold of the one in whose name it 
was made, if you can, and if you cannot, bury them beneath the threshold of 
any inhabited house, and the other likewise under the threshold of the other, 
as has been said, or under some house, as is written above. 2 And let them 
remain there seven days and seven nights. 

Then remove them before sunrise, take them to a secret place, and cast 
them into a fire, saying, ‘1 conjure you most inimical spirits, by the glory of 
the everlasting God, to sow and arouse as much hatred between so-and-so and 
so-and-so, whose names are carved here on these stones, as there is between 
you.’ When you have said this three times, take the stones from the fire, 
saying, ‘When their fury is enkindled against us, perhaps the waters had 
swallowed them up’ [Ps. 123:3f. Vulg.]. Then cast [ proiciamus] them into 
very cold water and let them stay there under a clear sky for three days and 
nights. On the fourth day take them and fumigate them with sulphur, saying, 
T conjure all you hateful and malignant, invidious and discordant demons ... 
to arouse at once between so-and-so and so-and-so as much hatred as there 
was between Cain and Abel. Arouse them and inflame them so much that one 
cannot stand to see the other, and one will afflict the other with immeasurable 
hatred, as a rebel.- May all love, affection, fraternity and concord be 
removed from them; let them be turned to enmity and utter hatred. ’ When you 
have said this three times, with constant fumigation, store them [the stones] 
away. 

The next night, beat the rocks together and strike one against the other, 
saying, ‘1 do not smash these stones, rather 1 smash so-and-so and so-and-so, 
whose names are written here, so that one will at once afflict the other and 
they will torment each other from now on with unconditional hatred. ’ 

And do this three times, each night and day, for several days. And 
immediately you will see or hear that they have become enemies and hate 


each other bitterly, so that neither can abide to see the other. 

If you wish to separate them altogether, causing one to flee the other, 
proceed as follows. Arise before sunrise on a Sunday, under a waning moon, 
especially when it is in combustion, and proceed in the direction of the 
sunrise.- When you have done this, take two stones that you have brought 
with you there, and rub them together vigorously, pounding one against the 
other, saying, ‘I do not smash these rocks, etc.’ When you have said this three 
times, bury whichever of them you wish. Then withdraw and go toward the 
west, and make a ditch there and bury the other in that place, saying, ‘As I 
have separated these stones, thus may so-and-so separate himself from so- 
and-so, and may they be as distant as these stones.’ When it has been buried, 
withdraw. And you will see them estranged, each separated from the other. 

This experiment must be kept secret, for it possesses ineffable power, and 
no remedy is to be found before they have been estranged and hate each other 
bitterly. 

But if you wish to restore them to their initial friendship, unbury the stones 
and place them in a furnace, and when they are well cooked smash them to 
little bits, and paste them together with water, and let [the newly formed 
mass] dry. When it is dried, cast it into the water of a river, saying, ‘Let all 
enmity be taken away that was between so-and-so and so-and-so, and let 
them return to their former affection, by the mercy of the gracious God, who 
does not regard the misdeeds of sinners. Amen.’ And you may be sure that on 
account of this they will be joined together at once, and all anger will be 
taken away, and they will enjoy their initial concord. 

Not only is the imitative action with stones at the heart of this experiment, 
even the conjuration involves an extension of the principle of imitative magic: 
the enmity produced by the magic is already manifested in the ‘hateful and 
malignant, invidious and discordant demons’ whose services are invoked, and 
the archetypal enmity between Cain and Abel serves as a paradigm for that 
intended by the magician. Apart from the verbal formulas, the magic is simple to 
the point of seeming primitive: the symbolic objects are not carved in the forms 
of the individuals represented, but are mere rocks, and the abuse to which they 
are subject is fairly simple exposure to the inimical elements of earth, fire and 
water. One might wonder why the sympathetic reversal provided in this 
experiment does not have the effect of utterly destroying the victims. The stones 
have all along symbolized the victims, and the crushing should have dire effects 


on them if the logic of sympathetic magic is consistently maintained. Obviously, 
however, this is not how the writer of the manual viewed matters. From his 
perspective the operations evidently took effect not simply ex opere operato but 
in accordance with the intentions of the operator as expressed in the 
accompanying words. 

Elsewhere the procedures for separation magic were more imaginative but 
still essentially imitative. Riccola di Puccio of Pisa was executed at Perugia in 
1347, in part for using magic to bring disaffection between a husband and wife; 
she recited charms and conjurations over an egg from a black hen, calling upon 
‘Mosectus, Barbectus and Belsabuct, the prince of demons’, as well as other 
demons of various ranks, then he cut the egg in half and gave one part to a 
female cat and the other to a male dog, saying, ‘In the name of the aforesaid 
demons may the love between [the two] be sundered as this egg is divided 
between the dog and the cat, and let there be such affection between them as 
between this dog and this cat.’- 

The other experiment in this category in the Munich handbook (no. 2) is 
intended to inflict dementia. The practitioner goes to his victim and openly 
recites a conjuration commanding the malign spirit Mirael to enter and afflict his 
brain. Then he makes a pen with wood from the victim’s door, and he inscribes a 
brief conjuration and a magic circle - a single band with the names of Mirael 
and the victim in the centre, and the names of ten demons within the band - on a 
piece of linen, and conjures the demons thrice. A set of sympathetic operations 
follows. The master goes to the victim’s house, urinates ‘in the manner of a 
camel’,- and buries the cloth; while doing so he says, ‘I bury you, so-and-so, in 
the name of the demons written round about you, so that these demons may 
always be around him, and all your power may be buried.’ He goes home and 
makes a candle, inscribed as was the circle. He lights the candle, saying, ‘Just as 
this candle, made for the destruction of N., bums and is consumed, so may all 
the power and knowledge he possesses be turned to madness ...’ He then 
extinguishes the candle, saying, ‘Just as this candle is extinguished, so may all 
the power in N. be utterly consumed.’ When he has repeated the procedure over 
seven days, the victim will become demented, and all who see him will marvel, 
though he himself will not recognize his condition and will assume that others 
are mad. If he wishes to restore the victim’s sanity, the master goes to his house 
and enjoins the demons to depart, thus counteracting the effects of his triple 
conjuration. Then he further nullifies the magic by removing the inscribed cloth 
and casts it into a fire, saying, ‘Just as this fire consumes this cloth, so may all 


this craft (ars) done by me against N. be wholly undone,’ then he casts the ashes 
into a flowing stream.- While the countermagic is itself sympathetic, it is not (in 
the same way as with no. 5) strictly a reversal of the original sympathetic magic 
involving the burning and extinguishing of a candle. 

There are recipes for madness in Picatrix, which involve not imitative magic 
but potions (made from the body parts of a cat, a hoopoe, a bat, a toad and other 
creatures) to be taken in food or drink, or a fume to be inhaled, whereupon the 
victim will be bedevilled ( demoniabitur ), losing his senses and memory, and not 
even knowing where he is.— The Munich handbook is perhaps remarkable for its 
thoroughgoing avoidance of such potions. It rarely combines the techniques of 
demonic with those of natural magic, and avoids giving recipes for potions 
whose magical virtue would normally be seen as inherent and natural, but does 
use imitative rituals, more readily seen as signs and signals to demons. 

The burial of some symbolic object is a recurrent theme in these 
psychological experiments, far more than in other types. Parallels can easily be 
cited in astral magic, for example in one section of Picatrix, which prescribes 
burying astrological images to attain friendship or love, to secure the fondness 
and obedience of a ruler’s subjects or a lord’s servant, to separate two friends, to 
cause a person to fall under the wrath of a king, to bring love between men and 
women - but also to destroy an enemy or a city or house, to prevent the 
construction of a building, to release a captive, to put a person to flight, to get rid 
of scorpions, to increase the fertility of the fields.- The psychological 
experiments of the Munich handbook which prescribe burial of some object may 
perhaps be borrowed from astral magic and elaborated with conjurations and 
other embellishments. Burial ensures secrecy, fixes the object’s location, and 
perhaps implies an appeal to demons or other chthonic powers. It makes the 
most obvious sense when a particular location is to be affected: like dragons 
hidden beneath the foundations of a building and causing its disruption, a buried 
image can work insidiously on the place where it lies. When the magic is 
psychological, the point is presumably to affect the victim’s mind by establishing 
a kind of magical force field within his or her environment. One might even 
speak of this is as environmental magic, designed to afflict individuals indirectly 
by planting sinister forces in or near the places they frequent. 

An experiment for gaining favour 

Magical techniques for ensuring favour in the eyes of a dignitary, or for 


prevailing over one’s adversaries in a court of law, are common in the literature 
of medieval magic, although they rarely if ever become subject matter for 
prosecution. They presuppose a magician connected to court circles or perhaps 
to the ecclesiastical hierarchy, or else a magician serving a client with political 
ambitions. In short, the context for use of such magic is precisely the sort that 
Edward Peters envisages: a courtly world rife with ambitions and ensuing 
tensions because of the possibilities for upward mobility and the threat of 
precipitous downward mobility.- The magic recommended for such purposes is 
often fairly simple. One fifteenth-century compilation prescribes writing out the 
SATOR-AREPO square on virgin parchment with the blood of a white dove, 
then carrying it on one’s person or in one’s hand, to ensure favour in the sight of 
all. The same collection says that various herbs, collected before sunrise in the 
sign of Virgo, will prevent people from speaking evil against the bearer.- 
Another compilation recommends writing out certain characters and carrying 
them in one’s left hand as a way of obtaining favours from any person.- 

From one point of view any attempt to manipulate another person’s mind or 
will is a hostile act. There are none the less significant differences from one 
experiment to another in the apparent attitude of the master and in the expected 
attitude of the victim: in the experiments we have examined above, the master is 
overtly hostile to the victims and expects them to undergo experiences that will 
be unpleasant for them; in the next experiments the master displays no overt 
hostility and anticipates that the people affected will become favourably 
disposed toward him, without feeling harmed or afflicted, and if anyone feels 
aggrieved it will presumably be either a rival claimant to favour or the victim at 
a later stage, when he realizes his will has been manipulated. 

The Munich handbook provides one rather elaborate experiment designed to 
gain favour with any manner of dignitary (no. 4): 

... I wish for you to read a well tested art for obtaining dignity and honour, 
status, and the supreme and undying love of a king, prelate, lord or, in 
general, any man you wish. 

First, you should have two soft rocks, which you should rub together so 
that their surfaces are entirely flush. When you have done this, you should 
carve in one the image of him [whose favour] you wish, beginning from the 
head and proceeding to the feet, making first the front and then the back side, 
and carving a crown on the head if it is a king, and so forth according to his 
dignity. When this is carved, you will carve on the [other] stone your own 


form, as best you can, beginning with the head, as before, first the front and 
then the back. When you have done this, inscribe his name on the forehead of 
the first [image], in the manner of a seal, and your name on yours. When you 
have done this, in the first hour of Sunday under a waxing moon take silver or 
tin and melt it over a fire. When it is melted, cast it in his form, saying, ‘1, so- 
and-so, wishing to obtain favour and be revered by him, and honoured and 
feared forever, form [this] image, made and carved in his name, by virtue of 
which he should love me without measure forever. ’ 

When you have done this, you should have an iron stylus, and on his 
forehead carve the name ‘Dyacom’; on his chest, the three names ‘Pumeon’, 
‘Terminas’, and ‘Peripaos’; and on [his] shoulders the six names ‘Madam’, 
‘Fabni’, ‘Gebel’, ‘Darail’, ‘Vmeloth’ and ‘Thereoth’; and on his stomach the 
name ‘Byreoth’. When you have inscribed these things, you should have a 
clean linen cloth, and wrap the image in it, then store it away carefully. 

On Thursday, at the first hour of the day, kindle a fire and similarly melt 
the tin and cast it in your form, saying, T, so-and-so, form my own image 
according to my likeness, by which I may rule forever over so-and-so and be 
loved and feared by him for all eternity.’ When you have made this, wrap it 
likewise in another linen cloth. 

Note that the image of him whose grace you wish to obtain should be the 
length of one semis- when it is carved in the stone, and the proportions of the 
stone should be such that your image may be larger than his by a third. And 
you should place a sceptre on your image as well. 

When you have done these things carefully, as instructed, on the following 
Friday at the first hour you should fumigate his image with these aromatics - 
cinnamon, long pepper and the herb agrimony - saying, T, so-and-so, 
exorcize you, image formed in the name of so-and-so, by the inseparable, 
unique, and undivided Trinity, and by all the thrones, dominations, and 
powers, and principalities, and [by the virtue] of all creatures, that by your 
power I may obtain the favour and love of so-and-so, in whose name it is 
made.’ 

Having said this three times, continue as follows: ‘O Dyacon, Pumeon, 
Termines, Peripaos, Midain, Fabin, Gebel, Dorayl, Vmeloth, Tereoth and 
Bireoth, most benevolent spirits who sow concord, with the greatest 
vehemence 1, so-and-so, pray you, 1 supplicate you, [and] 1 beg you, by the 
only Son of God, who by the shedding of his blood raised the dead human 
race, that by this image made in the name of so-and-so you may bind him to 


me in such a manner that he will revere me above all mortals, never wavering 
from agreement with me, but always obeying my commands. May he take 
pains to please me, by our same Lord Jesus Christ, who lives and reigns unto 
ages of ages. Amen.’ 

When you have said this prayer, take your hold your image in your right 
hand, and the other in your left, and join his image to yours, saying three 
times, ‘He has subjected the nations to us, and the peoples under our feet’ [Ps. 
46:4 Vulg.]. Then take a small iron chain and bind it to the neck of his image, 
placing the other end in the right hand of your image. Then, when it is firmly 
bound, say, ‘Just as you, O image formed in the name of so-and-so, are 
subjected and bound to my image, thus may so-and-so be bound to me utterly 
for all eternity. ’ Then take both hands of his image in your hands and bend 
them behind his back, saying, ‘By this image I bind the hands of so-and-so, 
that his hands may never have any power against me.’ Bend the head of his 
image to the ground, saying, ‘As this image, made in the name of so-and-so, 
stands before me with bended neck, thus may so-and-so never waver from my 
will, but follow me at all times and always serve me and love me and revere 
me for ever above all others, and strive to praise me.’ 

