SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 7/39  |  CHARS: 143267-167609 of 925451
============================================================

aginative fantasy and perceived fact is readily permeable: 
fantasies about harm that other people might inflict shade into paranoid fears of 
harm that they are inflicting; erotic fantasies, encouraged by techniques of erotic 
magic, can serve as prelude to actual seduction; purely recreational play with a 
Ouija board or tarot deck gives occasion for traumatic expression of deep-seated 
fantasies and anxieties; words spoken as playful boasts may be heard as 
confirmation of sinister powers. 

The tales told in this necromantic manuscript are perhaps best described as 
literary boasts, analogous to those in medieval literature.- And yet they are no 
less fantastic than those recorded in the witch trials of the later fifteenth and 
following centuries, and in some ways these tales are not unrelated to aspects of 
witchcraft. Indeed, this category of experiments more than others has points of 
contact with the ‘cumulative concept’ of witchcraft that became established in 
the fifteenth century, even if the parallels are not exact.- When the master has 
the demons take an oath (no. 6), this is conceived as unilateral; it is therefore not 
a pact. The spirits swear on an unspecified but consecrated book, and they bind 
themselves first by the God who created them and all things, second by the 
(presumably demonic) lords whom they fear and adore, and third by ‘the law 
that we observe’. The second and third elements in this oath presuppose what 
scholastic demonology did in fact generally assume, that demons are bound by a 
perverse hierarchy of their own - an inversion of the angelic hierarchy - and that 
there are infernal laws by which the demons are bound.- The banquet that 
demons bring forth is in one particular like the feasts ascribed in later years to 
witches at their sabbaths: the food does not really exist, so that the more one eats 
the hungrier one becomes, and a starving man who eats such fare will die just as 
if he ate nothing at all.— And in both no. 17 and no. 43, the magician is told that 
when he is flying on an illusory horse he must not make the sign of the cross, or 
the horse (in fact a spirit in the form of a beast) will flee from him, just as the 
witches were said to be warned.- (By way of contrast, the instructions for no. 8 
specify that while riding in a magically produced ship the master may invoke 
holy things, as in true Christian religion, because the spirits involved are 
between good and evil, neither in hell nor in paradise.) The parallel with notions 


from the witch trials is extended by a passage from the manuscript edited by 
Willy Braekman, which suggests that to travel quickly wherever one wishes, one 
should make an ointment from seven herbs, the fat of a goat and the blood of a 
bat, and smear it on one’s face, hands and chest, while reciting a short formula.- 
While this specific recipe may not be explicitly necromantic, it appears 
alongside instructions for demonic magic, and is strikingly parallel to the means 
witches were thought to use for their flight.— 

An illusory banquet 

The first two illusionist experiments in the Munich handbook have in mind a 
courtly setting: one is a procedure to conjure forth a lavish banquet, with 
entertainment of various kinds; the other creates the illusion of a castle in which 
an unnamed emperor may hold out against demonic troops. While the first 
illusion is simply for entertainment, the second is an elaborate trick on unwitting 
victims, though they may be supposed to have taken the hoax in good spirits. 

The experiment for obtaining an illusory banquet, with service and 
entertainment (no. 6), is one of the longest in the manuscript, and illustrates well 
the complexity so often found in these experiments: 

You have often seen me exercise at your court the art of summoning banquet- 
bearers.- First one must invoke fifteen spirits, in this manner: At the outset 
one must go outside town, under a waxing moon, on a Thursday or Sunday, at 
noon, carrying a shining sword and a hoopoe, and with the sword one must 
trace circles in a remote place. When this is done, inscribe sixteen names with 
the point of the sword, as will appear below in the figure. 

When you have done this, you should draw the sword toward the east 
within the inner circle, as the diagram shows. When this is done, you should 
bind the hoopoe to yourself in such a way that it cannot escape from the inner 
circle, in which you should stand. 

Then you should kneel, turn to the east, take the sword in both hands, and 
say, ‘Oymelor, Demefin, Lamair, Masair, Symofor, Rodobayl, Tentetos, 
Lotobor, Memoyr, Tamafrn, Leutaber, Tatomofon, Faubair, Selutabel, 
Rimasor, Syrama, most cheerful, glad and joyous spirits, I, so-and-so, adjure 
you ... to come to me here in a gentle, pleasing, and cheerful form and make 
manifest whatever I say. ’ 

When you have said this twelve [sic] times - four times facing east, then 


four times facing south, then four times facing east, then four times facing 
north - holding the sword in your hand the whole time, and while you are 
saying the conjuration constantly drawing it in each location, finally position 
it where it was at first, when the conjuration was first spoken, as has been 
said.- 

When you have said this, constantly kneeling, again turn to the east, 
holding the sword in your right hand, and the hoopoe in your left hand, and 
say, ‘Come, O aforesaid spirits, come to me, come, for 1 command you by the 
eternal glory of God. Amen. ’ 

When you have said this once, turn with the sword and the hoopoe toward 
the west, and you will see sixteen splendid and stalwart knights. They will 
say to you, ‘You summoned us and we have come, obedient to your will. Ask 
what you will, confident that we are ready to obey.’ Say in reply, ‘Make me 
see your power, that 1 may behold tables with many people reclining at them, 
with an infinite array of dishes.’ They will tell you that they are pleased to do 
so. 

At once many pages [domicelli ] will come, carrying three-legged tables, 
towels and other necessary equipment. Then the most noble of folk will come 
and recline, and butlers to serve, carrying an infinite array of dishes. And you 
will hear singing and music-making, and you will see dancing and 
innumerable games. And you may be sure that these twelve [sic] will not 
withdraw from you, but will stand just outside the circle, speaking with you 
and watching. You should also know that three kings will come to you beside 
the circle from among those who are reclining, and will ask you to come and 
eat with them. You should reply that you are quite unable to leave. When you 
have said this, they will return at once to those who are reclining, and you 
will hear them telling the others that they were unable to persuade you to 
move out of the circle. Then they will send a butler with some food or other, 
which you may safely eat, and you should offer some of it to the sixteen 
standing beside the circle, and they too will eat of it. Then you will see 
everyone rise from the tables and mount their horses in order. 

At last, all will vanish from your eyes except those twelve, who, standing 
by you, will say, ‘Our spectacle [ ludus ] has pleased you, has it not?’ You will 
reply cheerfully that it has. When you have responded, they will ask you for 
the hoopoe, which, strange to say, will at once become alarmed.- You will 
say to them, ‘I am willing to give you the hoopoe if you swear to come to me 
and enact this spectacle whenever 1 please.’ They will say that they are ready 


to swear. You should have some book brought to them at once, and on it you 
should have them swear in this manner: ‘All twelve of us swear on this sacred 
book ... to come to you without delay whenever you invoke us, and to have 
tables laid, such as you have seen and even better.’ And they will swear at 
once. 

And when they have sworn, you will give them the hoopoe, and when they 
have it they will ask your leave to withdraw. You will give it to them, saying, 
‘Go forth wherever you wish to go, and be attentive to me.’ They will say that 
they remain obliged to you from then on. Having said this, they will go. You 
too may leave the circles and erase them so that nothing remains, and, taking 
your sword, you may withdraw. 

You should note that the hoopoe is possessed of great virtue for 
necromancers and invokers of demons [nigromanticis et demones 
invocantibus ], on which account we use it much for our safekeeping. 

When you want them [the spirits] to come to you, in secret or openly, or in 
whatever place, gaze at the above-written circles and figures in the book, and 
in a quiet voice read the names found in them. When you have read them 
once while thus gazing, read this conjuration once: ‘Oymelor, Demefin, 
Lamair, Masair, Simofor, Rodobail, Tentetos, Lotobor, Memoir, Tamafin, 
Zeugaber, Tatomofon, Faubair, Belutabel, Rimasor and Sirama, 1 ask, conjure 
and adjure you by the true majesty of God to make your subordinates come 
here and bring dishes, first of all so-and-so and so-and-so, and make a grand 
banquet, with games, singing, music-making and dancing, and in general all 
those things that can gladden the hearts of those standing about [cf. Ps. 
103:15 Vulg.].’ When you have read this [conjuration] once, splendid pages 
will come and prepare beautiful tables. When these are set up, you will hear 
trumpets, harps and an untold multitude of songs. When you call out loudly, 
‘Bring water’, it will be brought forth at once. Likewise, ‘Bring forth the 
meal’, and at once it will be brought. And there will be butlers and stewards 
serving excellently, and handsome pages, and players providing countless 
entertainments. And you can have a thousand types of dish brought, if it 
pleases you, and those who eat them will find them uncommonly delicious. 

You must know that no matter how much they eat, they will be all the 
more hungry, because they will seem like dishes but they will not exist, so 
that if a famished person were to gorge himself, believing them to be real, he 
would no doubt die just as if he ate nothing. 

And when you wish to do away with the spectacle, say that they should 



take away the tables. At once the tables will be removed, but all those 
standing around will remain. If you wish for them to sing or play or make the 
entire spectacle, say, ‘Do thus and such’, and you will see what you wish, for 
these are spirits of spectacle and all entertainment, and they will do all that 
they are told. And when you want them to depart, say, ‘Withdraw, all of you, 
and whenever I call you to me, come forth without any excuse.’ They will 
reply, ‘We will do so most gladly!’ And when they have withdrawn, all will 
depart, wondering at this art. 

And here this art is concluded, which is virtually unknown among people 
today, and of which Matthew the Spaniard was utterly ignorant, etc. 

The circle to be used for this experiment is depicted: a quadruple band with a 
pentangle inscribed in the centre, a sword depicted at the top (extending 
downward across all four bands, with its point on the top of the pentangle) and 
other figures (likewise extending across all four bands) on the upper left, upper 
right, lower right, and lower left. The cardinal directions are given outside the 
outermost band, with east on top. Within the bands the names of sixteen spirits 
are inscribed.- 

Two points may suffice here by way of commentary. First, the idea of 
conjuring an illusory banquet is widespread. Celsus compared Christ with a 
magician who conjures forth an illusory banquet, and the same trick is found in 
an adjuration in the Greek magical papyri for obtaining a daimon as one’s 
assistant. Among the spirit’s myriad functions is that of procuring every manner 
of food except fish or pork. The magician need only imagine a banqueting hall 
and order the daimon to prepare a banquet, and immediately he will create a hall 
with marble walls and golden ceiling, all of which will seem partly real, partly 
illusion. He will bring fine wine, and further daimones made out as suitably 
attired servants.- Second, this experiment is exceptional for the Munich 
handbook in the degree of emphasis on the sacrifice of a hoopoe to the demons. 
This bird is famous for its magical virtues.- The present experiment notes 
explicitly that the hoopoe has great power for necromancers and invokers of 
demons, and for that reason is much used by such practitioners. Oddly, the text 
says that necromancers use the hoopoe a great deal for their safekeeping or 
protection (ad nostri tutelam), which perhaps means that they are safer in the 
company of demons if they have an offering to make them. The safety of the 
hoopoes seems not to be an issue. 

The fading of this insubstantial pageant might well recall that of a more 


famous illusion: 


Our revels now are ended. These our actors, 

As I foretold you, were all spirits, and 
Are melted into air, into thin air 

But of course the books from which that experiment derived have not survived 
for comparison with the Munich handbook. 

An illusory castle 

The following experiment (no. 7) is designed to obtain an illusory castle, with 
defenders. It is introduced in grandiose manner, as a ‘splendid experiment’ by 
which the magician can convoke spirits to produce an elegant castle with armed 
men. As in the preceding case, there are two phases, first the summoning of 
spirits and then having them work the illusion, although for reasons that we will 
see shortly, the second phase does not precisely involve a conjuration. 

Here follows another experiment- for invoking spirits so that a man can 
make a fine and well fortified castle appear, or for summoning countless 
legions of armed men, which can easily be done, and among other things is 
deemed most beautiful. 

First, go out on the tenth [day of] the moon, under a clear sky, outside of 
town to some remote and secret place, taking milk and honey with you, some 
of which you must sprinkle in the air. And with bare feet and head, kneeling, 
read this while facing west: ‘O Usyr, Salaul, Silitor, Demor, Zanno, Syrtroy, 
Risbel, Cutroy, Lytay, Onor, Moloy, Pumotor, Tami, Oor and Ym, squire 
spirits, whose function it is to bear arms and deceive human senses wherever 
you wish, I, so-and-so, conjure and exorcize and invoke you ... that, 
indissolubly bound to my power, you should come to me without delay, in a 
form that will not frighten me, subject and prepared to do and reveal for me 
all that I wish, and to do this willingly, by all things that are in heaven and on 
earth.’ Having read this once facing west, do so again facing south, east, and 
north. 

And from far off you will see a band of armed men coming toward you, 
who will send ahead a squire to say that those you summoned are coming to 
you. You should tell him, ‘Go to them and tell them to come to me in such a 
state that they frighten no one, but I may abide safely with them. ’ When you 


have said this, he will return at once to them. 

After a short interval they will come to you. When you see them, show 
them at once this circle, which has great power to terrify those fifteen 
demons;- they will see it and say, ‘Ask whatever you wish in safety, and it 
will all come to pass for you through us.’ You should then tell them to 
consecrate their circle so that whenever you gaze on it and invoke them they 
must come to you quickly and do that which is natural to them, namely make 
fortifications and castles and moats and a multitude of armed men appear. 
They will say they are willing to do so. You should extend a book to them, 
and you will see one of them place his hand on the book and speak certain 
words, which you will not understand. When this is done, they will restore it 
to you. 

Then they will ask you to permit them to leave, because they cannot depart 
from you except with permission. You should say to them, ‘Make a castle 
here, so that I may see your power.’ Immediately they will make a castle 
around you, with many other things, and you will see yourself in the middle 
of the castle, and a great multitude of knights will be present. But these 
fifteen will not be able to depart from you. After the space of an hour they 
will ask you that they may depart, and you should say, ‘Be ready whenever I 
gaze on this circle and invoke you to return at once.’- They will swear to 
come immediately. Then tell them to depart wherever they wish. And the 
entire spectacle [ludus] will be destroyed, and no one will remain there. 

When all this is done, return home, guarding well the book in which all 
power is found. And when you wish to work this fine art, gaze at the circle, 
reading the names, beginning from the east, saying, ‘O Usyr, Salaul, Silitol, 
Denior, Zaimo, Syrtroy, Ristel, Cutroy, Lytoy, Onor, Moloy, Pumiotor, Tamy, 
Dor, [and] Ym, I summon you to come here, by the consecration of this 
circle, in which your signs are inscribed, and to make a well fortified castle 
appear for me, with a deep moat, and a plenteous company of knights and 
footsoldiers.’ And suddenly a splendid castle, with all that is necessary, will 
appear there. If you wish to enter it, you can, for a knight will at once stand 
by you, to whom you may command that all you wish should appear, and he 
will have it done. 

Once when I [wished to test] this art I exercised it with the emperor, when 
many nobles were accompanying him on a hunting expedition through some 
dark forest. This is how I proceeded. First I gazed at the circle, calling the 
aforesaid demons with a clear voice. And at once a handsome knight came to 


me, whom no one but I could see, and who said to me, ‘I am one of the spirits 
you have invoked; I am named Salaul, and the others have sent me. 
Command what you will, and it will be done.’ 1 said to him, ‘I want you to 
have a legion of armed men appear, whom the emperor and his companions 
will take to be rebels.’ He said, ‘It is done.’ And then all the counts and the 
emperor himself turned and looked to the north, and from far off they saw 
coming to them an innumerable multitude of knights and soldiers. One of 
them dismounted, and before an hour’s time [ante magne hore spacium] came 
to the emperor and said, trembling, ‘Lord emperor, behold, an innumerable 
horde is coming toward us, swearing to put us and all your counts to death 
and to kill you pitilessly.’ On hearing this, the emperor and the counts did not 
know what to do. Meanwhile, the spirits approached. Seeing and hearing 
them, and their terrifying weapons, they began to flee, but the others followed 
them, shooting arrows, and cried with one voice, ‘You cannot escape your 
death today!’ Then I said, ‘O Salaul, make a wondrous castle before the 
emperor and his men, so that the emperor and the others can enter it. ’ And it 
was done. A perfectly safe castle was made for the counts, with towers and 
moat, and the drawbridge down. It seemed excellently constructed and filled 
with mercenaries, who were crying out, ‘O lord emperor, enter quickly with 
your companions!’ They entered, and it seemed that servants and many 
friends of the emperor were in it; he supposed he had come upon people who 
would defend him manfully. When they had entered, they raised the 
drawbridge and began to defend themselves. Then the spirits with their war 
machines attacked the castle with wondrous power, so that the emperor and 
the others feared all the more. Then Salaul said to me, ‘We do not have the 
power to remain here longer than a quarter of the day, so we must now 
withdraw.’ Then the castle disappeared, and the attackers, and everything 
else.- The emperor and the others then looked around and found themselves 
in some marsh, which left them greatly astonished. I said to them, ‘This 
episode has been quite an adventure!’ And after this experiment I made a 
dinner for them. 

Remember that this art cannot last longer than a quarter of a day, unless it 
lasts one quarter one time [and is then renewed for another quarter day], etc. 

One might have supposed that the trick played on the emperor constituted an 
act of rebellion deserving of execution; the tale, which must be read as such, 
asks us to suspend our disbelief and assume the emperor had unlimited capacity 


for being amused. The milk and honey that the magician sprinkles evidently 
serve as a kind of offering, which comes this time at the beginning rather than at 
the end of the ritual, as in no. 6; it is perhaps worthy of note that this theme of 
sacrifice occurs specifically in illusionist experiments set at court, and one might 
perhaps speculate that the offering is somehow analogous here to a courtly gift, 
but two examples provide too little evidence for such generalization. A further 
aspect of this experiment that calls for attention is the formula for recalling the 
spirits. Having summoned them, the master proceeds at once to an arrangement 
which will ensure multiple recurrence of the desired illusion. The formula to be 
used on further occasions is simple, and does not use the language of 
conjuration; presumably the demons are already bound by their own 
consecration of the circle, and need not be bound by the force of a formal 
conjuration. 

While extensive pursuit of parallels would lead to endless digression, two 
especially interesting ones deserve comment. The first is from The Quest of the 
Holy Grail, in which a lady who seeks in vain the love of Sir Bors threatens that 
she and her maidens will kill themselves by leaping from a tower unless he 
satisfies her. As they plunge from the battlements, Sir Bors crosses himself, and 
immediately is ‘enveloped in such a tumult and shrieking that it seemed to him 
that all the fiends of hell were round about him: and no doubt there were a 
number present. He looked round, but saw neither the tower nor the lady who 
had been soliciting his love ...’. Thus he knew ‘it was the enemy who had laid 
this ambush for him’.- In this case the phantom tower is a demonic snare, but 
not a work of magic created by demons at the behest of a magician. The second 
parallel, from much further afield, from the eleventh-century life of the Tibetan 
Buddhist saint Milarepa, is in this way more closely analogous to the tale in our 
necromantic handbook. When the lama Marpa had Milarepa construct a tall 
tower, the lama’s enemies attacked it, but ‘the lama conjured up some phantom 
soldiers, clad in armor, and put them everywhere, inside and outside the tower. 
His enemies said, “Where did Marpa get all these soldiers?”’ Terror-struck, they 
prostrated themselves and became disciples of the lama.- In this context 
sainthood and magic may be more closely related than in medieval Christianity; 
indeed, even in modern Tibet lamas are said to have risked moral defilement by 
using magical weapons against Chinese invaders.- Yet even within Tibet, not all 
magic is judged morally equivalent: Marpa may work a harmless trick of 
magical illusion without jeopardizing his standing, but the tower Milarepa is 
constructing is part of his arduous penance required for works of destructive 


magic in his life before attaining sainthood. 


Experiments to obtain a horse 

As we have already seen, magical flying horses are part of the stock in trade of 
magic lore; they migrate not only across the face of the earth but also between 
the magicians’ own writings and courtly literature.^ Johannes Hartlieb speaks of 
horses that come into an old house and transport a rider over many miles, and he 
hints rather vaguely at how it is done: one takes bat’s blood and binds oneself to 
the Devil with secret words such as ‘Debra ebra’; after riding one dismounts and 
takes the bridle; to return to one’s place of origin one need only shake the bridle 
and the horse will appear - but the horse is, of course, only a devil. Magic of this 
sort, he says, is widely known among princes. He also tells how unhulden and 
others use a salve called the unguentum pharelis, made of seven herbs mixed 
with the blood of a bird and the fat of an animal, smeared on benches, chairs or 
other objects, on which they then ride; this too counts for him as necromancy.- 

