SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 22/39  |  CHARS: 504276-528648 of 925451
============================================================

 
gives favour of all kings, 
marquises, and knights 
excellent physician for women, 25 

making them burn with love for 
men, on request transforming 
them into another form until 
they come to their beloved; 
makes sterile 

responds about hidden treasures; 27 

serpents appear, gives ov er 
serpents into the hands of 
exorcist 

responds about present, past, 27 

and future matters, and 
hidden treasures; giv es love of 
women, especially beautiful ones 

teaches trivium, reveals hidden 30 

treasures and other hidden 
things; causes person to cross 
sea and riv ers quickly 
teaches astronomy and other 30 

liberal arts; gives excellent 
familiars; gives favour of 
magnates and princes; 



Sucax marquis man, with 

woman’s face; 

appears 

benevolent 


reveals treasures guarded 
by spirits 

gives love of women, especially 23 

widows; gives command of 
languages; makes person pass 
quickly from region to region 


Notes 

1 Richard RH. Greenfield, Traditions of Belief in Late Byzantine Demonology (Amsterdam: Hakkert, 
1988), passim, esp. 307-26. 

2 Ibid., 275-6. 

3 C.S. Lewis, The Discarded Image: An Introduction to Medieval and Renaissance Literature 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1967), esp. 40-44 and 117. 

4 See the Paris conclusions of 1398, in Jean Gerson, OEuvres completes, 10, ed. Palemon Glorieux 
(Paris: Desclee, 1961-73), p. 89: the 23rd condemned article is ‘That some demons are good, some benign, 
some omniscient, others neither saved nor damned’. 

5 Thomas Aquinas, Summa theologiae, i. 109.1; Malleus maleficarum, i.4, trans. Montague Summers 
(London: Rodker, 1928; repr. London: Pushkin, 1948), 28-31; C.S. Lewis, The Screwtape Letters, xx (New 
York: Macmillan, 1962), 102. 

6 E.M. Butler, Ritual Magic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1949), 29-36, esp. 35. 

7 Summa theologiae, i. 109.1; Malleus maleficarum, i.4, 28-31. 

8 No. 2 (ten named demones maligni ); no. 5 ( spiritus inimicissimos)', no. 5 (onines demones odiosos et 
malignos, inuidios et discordes); no. 7 (fifteen named spiritus armigeri, quibus proprium est arma deferre et 
... sensus humanos decipere ); no. 8 {spiritus habitatores aque, qui naues ... periclitare conamini); no. 9 
(three named spiritus peccatoribus insistentes ); no. 35 {spiritus infemales ); no. 38 (Berith, described as 
fornicator, temptator, et seductor, possessor hominum). See also no. 3 {omnes demones in hac ymagine 
scriptos and demones in hoc circulo sculptos) and no. 5 {spiritus inimicissimos and omnes demones odiosos 
et malignos, inuidios et discordes). 

9 No. 38 (principes demoniorum); no. 11 {spiritus potentes, magnifici, et illustres); no. 15 (Bartha as 
rex, and Baltim, Galtim, and Saltim as duces)', no. 12 (Belial as inicialisprinceps); no. 39 (seven demons as 
subditi of Lytim). 

10 No. 4 (eleven spiritus benignissimi et concordiam seminantes ); no. 6 (sixteen spiritus iocundissimi, 
vlares, et gaudentes); no. 11 {spiritus potentes, magnifici, et illustres, in quibus omnino confido). 

11 No. 14 (O altissime et benignissime rex Orientis ); no. 41 {() Oriens benigne, maiorpars mundi, celi, 
terreque sator, cuius nuta [sic] omnia, tarn celestia quam terrestria, prouide facta sunt, benignissime 
Oriens). 

12 Ettore Vergo, ‘Intomo a due inediti documenti di stregheria Milanese del secolo XIV.’, Rendiconti 
del Reale Instituto Lombardo si Scienze e Lettere, ser. 2, vol. 32 (1899), 166-8; on Madonna Oriente see 
Carlo Ginzburg, Ecstasies: Deciphering the Witches ’ Sabbath, trans. Raymond Rosenthal (New York: 
Pantheon, 1991), esp. 92-6, 100-102, 131-6, 247-8. 

13 No. 22 {Deus, creator omnium rerum)', no. 25 {Omnipotens, sempiterne deus, Domine Ihesu Christe); 
no. 29 {Deus celi, deus terre, deus angelorum, deus archangelorum, qui es rex sanctorum omnium, 


patriarcharum ac prophetarum and Domine Ihesu Christe, fili dei viui, qui ex voluntate Pattis, cooperante 
Spiritu Sancto, per mortem tuam mundum viuificasti); no. 36 ( rex regum et dominus dominancium, eterne et 
incommutabilis deus dominus). 

14 Nos 2, 5, 12, 33, and 38 (Astaroth); no. 20 (Baruch); no. 12 (Belial); nos 1 and 38 (Belzebub); nos 1, 
3, 11, and 39 (Berith); no. 13 (Castiel); no. 1 (Lucifer); no. 2 (Mirael); no. 12 (Paymon); nos 1 and 27 
(Sathan). See the listings for each of these in Gustav Davidson, A Dictionary of Angels, Including the Fallen 
Angels (New York: Free Press, 1967), and for general information on demons see also Leander Petzoldt, 
Kleines Lexikon der Damonen und Elementargeister (Munich: Beck, 1990). On the naming of demons see 
Jeffrey Burton Russell, Lucifer: The Devil in the Middle Ages (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1984), 
248-50. 

15 Nos. 1,2, 27, and 38. 

16 Nos 1 and 5 (Apolin or Apolyn); no. 40 (Arath); no. 33 (Astra); no. 10 (Damay); no. 13 (Erlain); no. 
39 (Gana); nos 4 and 5 (Gebel); no. 6 (Lamair); no. 7 (Oor); no. 39 (Safrit); no. 7 (Tami); no. 11 (Taraor); 
no. 6 (Tatomofon); no. 40 (Thomo); no. 7 (Ym); no. 7 (Zanno or Zaimo). For these too see Davidson’s 
Dictionary. 

17 Hansen, Quellen und Untersuchungen, 71-82. 

18 Richard Kieckhefer, ‘The holy and the unholy: sainthood, witchcraft, and magic in late medieval 
Europe’, Journal of Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 24 (1994), 355-85; and in Scott L. Waugh and 
Peter D. Diehl, eds, Christendom and its Discontents: Exclusion, Persecution, and Rebellion, 1000-1500 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 310-37. 

19 Nicolaus Eymericus, Directorium inquisitorum, ii. 42-3 (Rome: Georgius Ferrarius, 1587), translated 
in Alan C. Kors and Edward Peters, eds., Witchcraft in Europe, 1100-1700: A Documentary History 
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1972), 84-92. See also Greenfield, Traditions of Belief, 
252-5. 

20 The classic source of the notion that Satan and the demons are redeemable is Origen; see on this 
theme Joseph Wilson Trigg, Origen: The Bible and Philosophy in the Third-century Church (Atlanta: John 
Knox, 1983), 89, 106, 138f., 206, 208. Whatever indirect influence Origen may have had on the 
necromantic tradition, it is difficult to believe that writers such as the compiler of the Munich handbook had 
any direct acquaintance with his works. 

21 Ch. 23. 

22 RawlinsonMS, 148r-149r, 150v, 154r. 

23 Coniuros vos demones infernales (fol. 121v). 

24 Bodleian Library, Oxford, Rawlinson MS D 252, fols 24r (prayer for power over all malign spirits); 
40v (prayer for power over Satan); 37r, 50r-50v, and 72r (prayers for protection from malign spirits); 152r 
(invocation of Satan); 12 lv ( Coniuro vos demones infernales)', 4v and 5v (implicit identification of spirits 
as demons); 78r-78v (prayer for vision of good angels); 123v (prayer that good angels be sent); 159v 
(prayer for three good angels to appear in a crystal); 135v-139r (prayer to guardian angel); 73r ( Coniuro 
vos spiritus beneuolos et demones). 

25 Aron Gurevich, Medieval Popular Culture: Problems of Belief and Perception, trans. Janos M. Bak 
and Paul A. Hollingsworth (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; Paris: Editions de la Maison des 
Sciences de l’Homme, 1988), 65-8 and Jeffrey B. Russell, ‘Saint Bonaventure and the eccentrics’, Church 
History, 33, (1964), 235-47, esp. 237-8. For general information on the cult of angels see A.A. Bialas, 
‘Devotion to angels’, The New Catholic Encyclopedia, 1 (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967), 514-15, and the 
sources cited there. 

26 Iohannes de Francofordia, Quaestio, utrum potestas cohercendi demonis fieri possit per caracteres, 
figuras atque verborum prolationes, in Joseph Hansen, ed., Quellen und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte 


des Hexenwahns und der Hexenverfolgung im Mittelalter (Bonn: Georgi, 1901; repr. Hildesheim: Olms, 
1963), 71-82. 

27 Page 72, citing the depiction of Leviathan: Et eciam lob 4. [i.e. 41:24 Vulg.] dicitur: non est potestas 
super terrain, qui ei comparetur, et textus ibidem loquitur de dvabolo. 

28 Gerson, OEuvres completes, 10, pp. 88f., art. 9, 17. 

29 Fols 77v-78r. 

30 M.R. James, ‘Twelve medieval ghost-stories’, English Historical Review, 37 (1922), 418f. 

31 The Malleus maleficarum, ii.1.4, pp. 109-14, discusses the nature of these assumed bodies in 
connection with the nature of incubi, and concludes that the demons confect ad hoc flesh from the elements 
in the surrounding air. 

32 De Nigromancia of Roger Bacon, iv.3, ed. and trans. Michael-Albion Macdonald (Gillette, NJ: 
Heptangle, 1988), 33, 56f. 

33 On demons in the form of beasts, see Russell, Lucifer, 209: ‘Until the eleventh century the Devil was 
generally portrayed either as a human or as an imp, and this tendency persisted in Byzantine art. In the 
West, beginning in England about 1000 and spreading to Germany about 1020 and then beyond, the Devil 
tends to be a monstrous composite of human and animal.’ 

34 St. Athanasius, ‘Life of St. Anthony’, eh. 9, in Roy J. Deferrari, et al., trans., Early Christian 
Biographies (Washington: Catholic University of America Press, 1952), 144. 

35 Fol. 27v. 

36 It is evidently the dragon that is two-headed, although the context does not make the point clear. 

37 On this point see the Malleus maleficarum, ii.1.4 (p. 109), and Thomas Aquinas’s Summa theologiae, 
1.51.2 ad 4. 

38 F.C. Conybeare, ‘The Testament of Solomon’, Jewish Quarterly Review, 11 (1899), 1-45. 

39 On this material see generally Butler, Ritual Magic, 47-89, and Arthur Edward Waite, The Book of 
Ceremonial Magic (repr. Secaucus, NJ: Citadel, 1961), 58-66. 

40 Gerson, OEvres completes, 10, p. 90, art. 25. 


8 


The Magic of Circles 
and Spheres 

I f necromancy was in one sense chiefly the art of conjuring, it was also widely 
associated in the popular mind with the drawing of magic circles. The 
Fasciculus morum says of necromancers ( nigromantici ) first of all that they 
‘raise devils in their circles that are expected to answer their questions’, and only 
secondly that they also ‘make figures of people in wax or some other soft 
material in order to kill them’. 1 In The Pilgrimage of the Life of Man, the 
messenger of Necromancy traces a circle on the ground, with characters and 
figures, and informs the Pilgrim that his invocation causes the spirits to answer 
and obey, and they cannot withstand his prayers, characters, and conjurations 
because he holds a commission from ‘the King’, meaning God, to whom they 
are subject. 2 The Yorkshire manuscript mentioned earlier tells how one man used 
a magic circle in conjuring not a demon but a ghost: 

... he came to the assigned place and made a large circle with a cross, and it 
had on it [the opening words of ?] the four gospels and other sacred words, 
and he stood in the middle of the circle, placing four small reliquaries in the 
form of a cross on the rim of the circle, and saving words such as ‘Jesus of 
Nazareth’ and so forth were inscribed on the reliquaries. Then he waited for 
the spirit to arrive. Finally he came, in the form of a goat, and three times he 
went around the circle, going ‘a-a-a, a-a-a, a-a-a’. But when he was conjured 
he fell to the ground and rose up again in the form of a man of great height, 
horrid and gaunt, like one of the dead kings shown in paintings.- 

Like conjuration, the use of magic circles appears to have spread beyond the 
sphere of clerical necromancy. For example, a woman charged with witchcraft at 
Provins in 1452 was said to have belonged to a ‘sect’ of witches that conjured 
the Devil by tracing three evidently concentric circles on the ground.- What this 
incident probably represents is not a popular tradition parallel to that of the 


necromancers, but influence from their tradition. 


Form and preparation of the magic circle 

These magic circles could at times be very simple, but sometimes they were 
elaborate diagrams made on specially constructed platforms.- The Sworn Book 
ascribed to one ‘Honourius, son of Euclid’, gives elaborate instructions for 
constructing a magic circle. The magician must construct a square platform 
fourteen feet across of good and well dressed stone, or of tile, or (if necessary 
because of poverty) of pure earth. On top of it he must fashion a circular 
platform, seven feet across and three feet high. The site must be ritually purified 
and consecrated, with blessings, incense, and invocation of angels. Then, 
presumably on top of the circular platform, he must make two concentric circles, 
carved with a new knife or inscribed in chalk, with the names written in the band 
between the circles. In a later chapter the magician is told that in an elaborate 
ceremony of consecration he should carve or inscribe four concentric circles, the 
smallest nine feet and the largest twelve feet across, with names of God and of 
angels in the bands and the seal of Solomon in the centre. Then there must be 
two concentric squares around these circles, with the corners pointing in the 
cardinal directions, names of God between the squares, and lighted censers 
placed within two smaller concentric circles at each of the four corners. - 

The De nigromancia associated with Roger Bacon provides even fuller and 
more elaborate instructions for preparing and consecrating a magic circle. The 
magician must have a square ‘secret vault’ constructed in some remote place, 
twenty feet to each side at most, and twenty feet high at least, with windows 
facing the cardinal directions. Inside this building he must inscribe two 
concentric circles in chalk, fifteen feet at the most across, with characters and 
names of spirits inscribed. There are distinct kinds of circles for spirits of the air, 
fire, water, and earth, but the treatise is not altogether clear regarding the 
distinguishing features. The consecration entails, among other things, having a 
priest say a mass in honour of Saint Cyprian, famous for having been a 
magician.- A later chapter gives further details: the pentacle of Solomon should 
circumscribe the circle; the Tetragrammaton must be inscribed on all circles, 
because without it ‘all conjurations of the spirits will fail, and no spirit will 
answer truth, but falsehood’; and an appropriate time must be observed for 
making the circle.- Elsewhere the treatise recommends a circle for discovery of 
hidden treasure that is inscribed on a circular sheet of vellum eight feet in 


compass, which should have ten loops with which it can be pinned to the 
ground. 1 2 

The Rawlinson necromantic manuscript is more interested in conjurations 
than in circles, but does prescribe and depict circles in connection with some of 
its conjurations, sometimes very simple, sometimes with pentangles and words 
and characters inscribed, and says at one point that the master should trace a 
circle with the point of his sword. There as elsewhere, however, circles may be 
inscribed not on the ground, as a location for conjuring, but on a moveable 
object, as a means for gaining power over the spirits: at one point the reader is 
told to draw a circle on a tablet, with the name ‘Satan’ inscribed in it.— 

Magic circles in the Munich handbook 

The circles in Clm 849 consist most fundamentally of single circular bands or 
varying numbers of concentric bands, between two and four.- Beyond this 
simple composition are various complicating factors: a single band inscribed 
within a square (no. 1); an inverted triangle inscribed within the outer boundary 
of a single band (no. 15); a double band divided into ten segments, and a 
rectangle inside the circle divided into six sections (no. 18); a double band with 
its interior divided into six wedges (no. 22); a triple band with a cross dividing 
the interior into four wedges (no. 40); a square inscribed in a single band, with a 
circle inside the square, and short bars extending outward from the middle of 
each side of the square and touching the inner side of the circular band (no. 9); a 
single band bisected by a horizontal band, while a vertical band bisects the upper 
portion of the circle, and a closed crescent shape (presumably representing a 
ship) appears in the upper two-thirds of the circle, with two dots beneath it at the 
prow and the stern (no. 8). Another experiment (no. 13) is unusual in having not 
a circle but a shield with a single band around its edge. 

Inscriptions are of various kinds: 

1. Four cardinal directions, with east on top in the fashion of traditional 
medieval cartogarphy: nos 1, 6, 9, 15, 36; at times not all the directions are 
explicitly given (nos 8, 10, 11). 

2. Positions of the master and child medium: The position of the master is 
often marked in the centre of the circle, with the term Locus magistri (nos 3, 
7, 9, 12) or simply Magister (nos 10, 11). The circle for no. 8 marks the 
position with the inscription Hie magister cum suis sociis. No. 1 has Nomen 


magistri, de tali ordine and Nomen discipuli are marked in the center. The 
positions for no. 22 are in the literal sense eccentric: inscriptions indicate that 
the master and boy are to sit on top of pentagrams on opposite sides of the 
circle: Hie sederat [=sedeat ] puer super signum (at the top), and Hie sedeat 
magister super signum a latere sinistro (at the bottom). Toward the middle of 
the circle for no. 40 are word fragments and N.p. (presumably for Nomen 
pueri ). 

3. Names of spirits, given most frequently within the bands: no. 1 has the 
names of the spirits Belial, Satan, Osendior, Matalot, Belzebub, Lucifer, 
Sententino and Apolin inscribed in and around its band; no. 2 has Oreoth, 
Pinen, Otel, Tryboy, Noryoth, Belferith, Camoy, Astaroth, Sobronoy and 
Sismael inscribed in its band, and the names Mirael and N. (for the name of 
the intended victim) inscribed in its centre; no. 3 has the names Rator, 
Lampoy, Despan, Brunlo, Dronoth, Maloqui, Satola, Gelbid, Mascifm, 
Nartim and Lodoni; no. 6 has the names Oymelor, Symofos, Manoir, Faubair, 
Demefin, Rodobayl, Tamafin, Abelutabel, Lamair, Tentetos, Leutaber, 
Rimasor, Masair, Lotobor, Tatomofon and Sirama; no. 7 has O Vsyr, Salaul, 
Silitor, Demor, Zanno, Syrtroy, Risbel, Cutroy, Litor Onor, Moloy, Pumotor, 
Tami, Oor and Ym, spiritus armigeri, in its bands; no. 8 has the names Fyron, 
Dyspil, Onoroy, Sysabel, Cotroy, Tyroy, Rimel and Orooth; no. 9 has the 
names Lantrayth, Feremni and Oliromim; no. 10 has O Brimer, Suburith, 
Tranauit, Lyroth, vnq (?) Berien, Damayn; no. 11 has the names Firiel to the 
west, Melemil to the south, Berith to the east, and Taraor to the north; no. 18 
has the names Latranoy, Iszarin, Bicol, Danmals, Gromon, Zara, Ralkal, 
Sigtonia, Samah and Meneglasar written in the ten segments of its outer band, 
corresponding figures in its inner band, and the letters F-L-O-R-O-N in the 
six sections of its inner rectangle; no. 12 has the invocation Tu Belial, tu 
Astaroth, tu Paymon, ad hoc sitis opus michi adiutores; no. 13 has the names 
Asyel, Castyel, Lamsiyel, Rabam, Erlain, Olam and Belam in horizontal 
bands; no. 23 has the name Lylet (or Bylet) inscribed in its centre. 

4. Sacred names: no. 16 has Agla / Michael virtus dei / Gabriel fortitudo / 
Emanuel Paraclitus / Raphael medicina dei / Alpha et O, Oli, Ely / 
Tetragrmaton, amen/Agla inscribed inside a double band, with a cross inside 
a square before and after each line of text; no. 36 has four divine names 
outside its triple band: Sabaoth at the top, Tetragramaton at the right, and 
Adonay at the bottom, Agla at the left. 



5. Miscellaneous inscriptions: no. 15 has characters in what appears to be 
pseudo-Hebrew; to the right of the circle for no. 22 is a rectangular signum 
with the inscription Esto altissimus, vnus, eternus, amen , on five horizontal 
bands; no. 40 shows the word onus (possibly for On) four times. 

Various types of sign and other objects also appear: 

1. Pentagrams (or pentangles). No. 6 has a pentagram inscribed in its centre; 
no. 10 has a pentagram inscribed; no. 23 contains two pentagrams with the 
name On just beyond each point inscribed in the upper and lower wedges, and 
two more to the lower left and right of the circle. 

2. Astronomical characters and miscellaneous figures: no. 6 shows radiating 
figures extending across its bands on the upper left, upper right, lower right, 
and lower left; nos 9 and 10 show astronomical and other signs alongside the 
names of spirits; no. 11 has two figures. - 

3. Objects to be used in the experiments: no. 6 shows a sword at the top, 
extending downward, with its point on the top of a pentangle); no. 11 shows a 
sword lying toward the east with its point near the centre; no. 15 has dots 
evidently denoting positions for jars. These objects are presumably not meant 
to be drawn, but rather positioned where they are shown. Alongside the circle 
for no. 2 runs a vertical band labelled Hoc [or hie] est candela and inscribed 
with the names Oreoth, Pinen, Ocel, Triboy, Norioth, Belferith, Camoy, 
Astaroth, Sobronoy. 

When prayers are shown inscribed on the bands, these may be meant to be 
inscribed, but are perhaps more often to be recited as the circles themselves are 
traced: 

The first circle for no. 39 has In nomine Patris et Filij et Spiritus Sancti; In 
nomine indiuidue trinitatis, Alpha et O, deus et homo ; and Ego te facio per 
ilium qui creauit celum et terram, mare et omnia que in eis sunt in its three 
bands. 

The second circle for no. 39 has In nomine Patris et Filij et Spiritus Sancti, 
Celi enarrant in the middle band, and Deus tuum [sic] regi da in its three 
bands. 

No. 36 has inscriptions in each of its three bands: ^ Hunc circulum facio in 


nomine dei Patris omnipotentis, qui solo verbo vniuersa creauit in the 
outermost; Hunc circulum facio in nomine dei viui qui humanum genus 
humano sangwine redemit in the middle, and ft* Hunc circulum facio in 
nomine Spiritus Sancti paracliti, quia [sic] apostolorum et prophetarum 
corda sua gracia illustrauit in the innermost. In the upper left, a further 
inscription begins in the outer circle and ends in the middle one: Per hoc 
signum sancte crucis gracia dei defendat nos ab omni malo. 

No. 40 has ft* Hunc circulum facio in nomine Patris omnipotentis dei, qui solo 
verbo cuncta creauit. Dextera domini fecit virtutem, dextera domini exaltauit 
me, non moriar sed viuam et narrabo opera domini. Castigans castigauit 
dominus in (and extending beyond) its outermost band; ft* Hunc circulum 
facio in nomine filij unigeniti dei viui, qui humanum genus proprio sangwine 
redemit. Dextera domini fecit virtutem, dextera domini exaltauit me, non 
moriar sed viuam et narrabo opera in its middle band; and ft* Hunc circulum 
facio in nomine Spiritus Sancti paracliti, qui corda apostolorum et 
prophetarum suorum sanctissimam graciam [.s7c] illustrauit. Dextera domini 
fecit virtutem, etc. in its outermost band. 

No. 23 has Deus sanctus, deus omnipotens, deus fords, deus inmortalis, pater 
futuri seculi. 

No. 12 gives a modified conjuration that is shown on the circle for no. 12: Tu 
Belial, tu Astaroth, tu Paymon, ad hoc sitis [michi deleted] opus michi 
adiutores. 

One of the experiments in the Munich handbook (no. 7) speaks of the circle as a 
representation of the spirits’ habitation, perhaps implying a conception of Hell 
related to Dante’s, but the point remains implicit and undeveloped. And in one of 
the handbook’s experiments (no. 33) an unusual kind of magic circle is required: 
the master goes to a cemetery and gathers as many stones as there are verses in 
Psalm 50, and with them he makes a circle, then sprinkles it with verbena. 

The function of the magic circle: protection or heightening of power 

Magic circles are usually represented in histories of magic as protective 
devices,- and at least sometimes they performed that function. In one of the 
exempla told by Caesarius of Heisterbach, a cleric famed for his skill in 
necromancy agrees to conjure demons to persuade a knight who does not believe 


in them. The cleric inscribes a circle on the ground at a crossroads, and warns 
the knight that he must remain within the circle as protection from the demons, 
and within this protective confine the knight remains secure (albeit terrified) 
when demons and the Devil himself arrive. In another exemplum, individuals 
who dare to step outside the circle are immediately attacked by the fiends.- 

