SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 3/39  |  CHARS: 47652-72434 of 925451
============================================================

y expressive and not objectively effective.- Magic rituals in medieval 
Europe were clearly intended to produce results: to arouse passion, to drive 
people mad, to find stolen goods, and so forth. Judicial evidence makes it 
clear that the practitioners, the clients and the victims all expected magic to 
have objective effect, and when it did not this was because the specific 
practitioners were inept or did not perform rituals with sufficient strength to 
command the demons they summoned. - 

In one sense, however, Gusfield’s formulation does apply to magic. 
Magical rites, like prayers of petition, may be used for practical ends, but 
any goals extrinsic to the ritual presuppose an effect intrinsic to it. The 
prayers and actions that constitute orthodox ritual first of all transform the 
relationship between the praying person and God, as also the relationship 
with the persons prayed for, with others in whose company one is praying, 
and with others throughout history who have said the prayer in question. If 
such ritual is transformative, the transformation is in the first instance one 
that occurs within the ritual itself. The participants in the ritual become 
different, and the network of relations in which they stand is reconfigured. 
Even if no further results ensue, for the duration of the ritual the world of 
the participant is transformed. Normally one undertakes a ritual with the 
expectation of further, extrinsic changes, moral or physical, but these are 
secondary, at least in a logical sense, however important they are to the 
participant: they are secondary because they presuppose a prior change 
within the ritual itself, an empowerment of the participant that then makes 
extrinsic change possible. Ritual can be effective for other purposes only if 
it first is effective as ritual. It can have secondary efficacy only by virtue of 
its primary efficacy. The principle holds in the case of magical rites, and 
perhaps most especially those involving demonic magic: even if they are 
undertaken for the sake of some practical end, that purpose can be 
accomplished only because within the ritual there is a transformed 
relationship between the magician and God, between the magician and the 
demons, and perhaps also between the magician and other humans. Calling 
upon the aid of God, the magician seeks power over the demons; the 
primary purpose of the ritual is to build sufficient power that the magician 
may compel the spirits to do his will. Only if within the ritual itself this 
transformation of power is attained can the magician accomplish any other 


goal. 

The efficacy of ritual ex opere operato must be perceived in this light. 
Thomas Aquinas was stating the common perception of theologians in the 
later Middle Ages when he recognized the mass and sacraments as having 
objective effect independent of the disposition and moral status of the 
celebrant and minister. That ritual was inherently efficacious (ex opere 
operato ), apart from any further effect to be gained by virtue of the 
minister’s or participants’ disposition (ex opere operantis), by no means 
meant that the rite was magical. Whether an operation qualified as magic or 
not depended chiefly on which powers it invoked: if it called upon celestial 
or manifest natural powers it was not magic, but if it appealed to demonic or 
occult natural powers it was magic.- Rituals that called upon angelic aid 
formed an ambiguous category, possibly but not necessarily magical, but 
mainly because the identity of the angel summoned might be in doubt.- 

A ritual, magical or otherwise, could have efficacy ex opere operato 
precisely because it transformed the status of the performer and his or her 
relationship with God, with other spirits, and with humans. It was clearly 
this fear of the efficacy of magic ex opere operato that led an actor playing 
in the Jeu de Sainte Barbe in 1470 to make a notarized counterpact 
declaring that ‘by the invocations and anathemas of the demons which he 
makes in the play ... he does not intend to speak from the heart but only in 
the manner of the play, and that on that account the enemy of human kind, 
the devil, should not have any claim on his soul’.- But the force of magical 
ritual was not in all respects analogous to that of other rites. Ordinary prayer 
and official ritual assume that the spirits invoked are in general well 
disposed toward humankind, and enter readily into a helping relationship. 
The praying person’s invocation of God or a saint is an appeal to a 
benevolent being. In this respect the rituals of demonic magic differ from 
other rites: they invoke fallen spirits taken (by the necromancers as well as 
by their critics) to be unwilling, uncooperative, inimical and treacherous. 
The operations of demonic magic, more than other rituals, are thus explicit 
contests of wills. The necromancer recognizes a need to heap conjuration 
upon conjuration, and to buttress these formulas with supporting means of 
power, precisely because the demons are reluctant to come, and if they come 
will do everything in their power to escape the magician’s control, threaten 
him, and deceive him. To gain the upper hand in the contest, the magician 
must hold the strongest possible means for power over the demons, and 


must adjure them in the name of all that is holy to come in non-threatening 
form, to cause no harm, and to tell only the truth. Yet all of these factors, far 
from undercutting Gusfield’s analysis, actually strengthen it: they show how 
vitally important it was for the magician to focus his attention and his 
energies on the immediate consequences of his ritual action. His rites could 
be efficacious for extrinsic purposes only if they were first effective as rites, 
as ritual contests with cunning and powerful spiritual adversaries who could 
nevertheless be induced to fulfill his command. 

The function of language within magical ritual is a subject to be explored 
in detail when we examine formulas of conjuration in a later chapter. The 
general topic is one S.J. Tambiah has discussed, with focus on the use of 
special languages, or the use of elements from various languages, in magical 
practice.- Necromantic conjurations of the late Middle Ages are almost 
entirely in Latin, which marks them not as specifically magical but as 
similar to ordinary liturgical formulas. Some experiments give formulas in 
what is said to be Chaldean, thus making an appeal to the authority of 
ancient Jewish magic analogous to that of later Christian Kabbalists. But 
when a child medium is used, he is sometimes licensed to conjure the spirits 
in the vernacular. On one level one might say that the choice of language is 
a matter of indifference: the demons or other spirits being conjured know all 
human tongues and can be addressed effectively in any of them. Yet in a 
different way the selection of language was important, because it was only 
formulas in Latin that were clearly related to the prayers of mainstream 
liturgy. Necromancers who had command of Latin and could use it to 
demonstrate the groundedness of their rites in the liturgical tradition of the 
Church could no doubt gain readier acceptance as authentic masters of their 
art. And even if demons could understand other languages, they seemed 
(like God) to pay special attention when addressed in Latin. 

In any case, within medieval culture, magical words were seen as 
effective not per se but rather as means for evoking the effective presence of 
the archetypal powers to which they refer. Magical language is thus not in a 
simple sense the cause of efficacy but rather its occasion ; the cause is a 
network of forces released and coordinated by the magician’s verbal cue. 
The situation is analogous to that of the eucharist: the priest’s utterance of 
the words of consecration is not the cause of transubstantiation but rather 
the divinely ordained occasion for divine intervention. One might suppose 
that this distinction is too subtle to have been clear to the common 


necromancer, but in fact the point is clearly articulated in the conjurations 
themselves, which not only acknowledge but insist that the sources of their 
own power are the archetypal forces they bring to bear upon the situation at 
hand. 

The magic we are dealing with, then, borrows the conventions of 
liturgical prayer and has efficacy resembling that of the sacraments. In other 
respects, however, the fitting comparison is not so much with liturgy and 
sacraments as with the private devotions that were proliferating in the late 
Middle Ages, and the analogue to the book of magic is less the missal than 
the private prayer book. Ritual magic and devotions alike showed how 
liturgical formulas could be adapted for private and domestic use; indeed, 
one central point of devotionalism was to provide a network of connections 
between church and home, bonding them in an increasingly complex 
relationship, and imparting to the home some of the fervour and sacrality of 
the church. Magic resembles the devotionalism of the books of hours and 
other prayerbooks in its translation of official rites into an unofficial and 
largely private setting.- Books of magic, like books of devotion, 
proliferated in the expanding marketplace of privately owned and privately 
read texts. 


Plan of this book 

The following chapter will introduce the manuscript to which this study is 
chiefly devoted. Subsequent chapters fall into two blocks. Chapters 3-5 
examine the experiments according to the chief purposes for which they are 
performed: entertainment (illusionist experiments), power over other 
individuals (psychological ones), and knowledge (divinatory ones). The 
chief point of these chapters is to show that within this body of material 
there are in fact fairly clearly distinguishable subtraditions, and to sketch the 
common characteristics of each. Chapters 6-8, then, analyse the sources and 
techniques used to gain magical power, in particular the conjurations (and 
the demonology assumed by these conjurations), the magic circles, and the 
formulas of astral magic - techniques that cut across the categories 
discussed in the earlier chapters, and thus represent elements of continuity 
within the diversity of necromantic practice. 

Throughout the book I will give translations (my own, unless otherwise 
noted) of source material for the study of late medieval necromancy. Most 


of these passages are from the Munich handbook; to give a sense of the 
cultural context, 1 have included some material from other writings of the 
magicians and from writings about and against demonic magic. 1 have opted 
not to give a complete translation of the Munich handbook; both specialists 
and general readers, 1 assume, will be better served by selective translation 
of representative and particularly interesting passages (selected perhaps 
disproportionately but not exclusively from the earlier sections of the 
handbook), integrated into my analysis. This option seems especially 
appropriate given the largely repetitive nature of the material, and the need 
to situate it in its cultural context. The Latin text is, in any case, available at 
the end of the volume for those who wish to probe more deeply. 

Notes 

1 On the general topic of literacy in the late Middle Ages see Eamon Duffy, The Stripping of the 
Altars: Traditional Religion in England, 1400-1580 (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), 53- 
88; Malcolm B. Parkes, ‘The literacy of the laity’, in David Daiches and Anthony Thorlby, eds, 
Literature and Western Civilization, 2 (London: Aldus, 1973), 555-77; Paul Saenger, ‘Silent reading: 
its impact on late medieval script and society’, Viator, 13 (1982), 367-414; and, for a somewhat 
earlier period, Brian Stock, The Implications of Literacy: Written Language and Models of 
Interpretation in the Eleventh and Twelfth Centuries (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1983). 

2 See especially Peter Biller and Anne Hudson, eds, Heresy and Literacy, 1000-1530 (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1994), and Nicholas Watson, ‘Censorship and cultural change in late- 
medieval England: vernacular theology, the Oxford translation debate, and Arundel’s Constitutions of 
1409’, Speculum, 70 (1995), 822-64. On certain aspects of books as magical objects see Peter Ganz, 
ed., Das Buch als magisches und als Reprasentationsobjekt (Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz, 1992), esp. 
Brian P. Copenhaver, ‘The power of magic and the poverty of erudition: magic in the Universal 
Library’, 159-80. 

3 Barthelemy Haureau, Bernard Delicieux et l ’Inquisition albigeoise, 1300-1320 (Paris, 1877), 
143-65; Lea, History, vol. 3, 45If.; Conrad Eubel, ‘Vom Zaubereiunwesen anfangs des 14. 
Jahrhunderts (mit urkundlichen Beilagen)’, Historisches Jahrbuch der Gorres-Gesellschaft, 18 
(1897), 628f.; Joseph Hansen, Zauberwahn, Inquisition und Hexenprozefi im Mittelalter, und die 
Entstehung der grofien Hexenverfolgung (Munich: Oldenbourg, 1900; repr. Aalen: Scientia, 1964), 
253f. The relevant documents are now available in Alan Friedlander, ed., Processus Bernardi 
Delitiosi: The Trial of Fr. Bernard Delicieux, 3 September-8 December 1319 (Transactions of the 
American Philosophical Society, 86/1) (Philadelphia: American Philosophical Society, 1996). 

4 Joseph Hansen, ed., Quellen und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte des Hexenwahns und der 
Hexenverfolgung im Mittelalter (Bonn: Georgi, 1901; repr. Hildesheim: Olms, 1963), 2-4; Norman 
Cohn, Europe’s Inner Demons: An Enquiry Inspired by the Great Witch-Hunt (London: Chatto, 1975), 
193. 

5 Eubel, ‘Vom Zaubereiunwesen’, 609-25; Robert Michel, ‘Le proces de Matteo et de Galeazzo 
Visconti: l’accusation de sorcellerie et d’heresie, Dante et Taffaire de l’envoutement (1320)’, 
Melanges d’archeologie et d’histoire, 29 (1909); Hansen, Zauberwahn, 333f.; Cohn, Europe’s Inner 


Demons, 192. 

6 Pierre Luc, ‘Un complot contre le Papa Benoit XIII (1406-7)’, Melanges d’archeologie et 
d’histoire de VEcole de Rome, 55 (1938), 374-402. 

7 Margaret Harvey, ‘Papal witchcraft: the charges against Benedict XIII’, in Derek Baker, ed., 
Sanctity and Secularity: The Church and the World (Oxford: Blackwell, 1973), 109-16; J. Vincke, 
‘Acta Concilii Pisani’, Romische Quartalschrift, 46 (1938), esp. 183-208. 

8 Gene A. Brucker, ‘Sorcery in early Renaissance Florence’, Studies in the Renaissance, 10 
(1963), 19f., 23., citing G. Sanesi, ‘Un episodio d’eresia nel 1383’, Bullettino senese di storiapatria, 
3 (1896), 384f. 

9 Brucker, ‘Sorcery’, 13-16, 22f. 

10 Nicolaus Eymericus: Directorium inquisitorum, ii.43.1, (Rome: Georgius Ferrarius, 1587), also 
tells of having captured necromancers’ books and had them burned in public. 

H Lynn Thorndike, A History of Magic and Experimental Science, 3 (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1934), 511, citing Rudolf Dier de Muiden, Scriptum de magistro Gerardo, ed. G. 
Dumbar in Analecta seu vetera aliquot scripta inedita (Deventer, 1719), 1—12. 

12 Quotation from the New Revised Standard Version. For a discussion of the distinctive setting 
at Ephesus see Clinton E. Arnold, Ephesians: Power and Magic: The Concept of Power in Ephesians 
in Light of its Historical Setting (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989). 

13 Francis A. Gasquet, ed., Collectanea Anglo-Premonstratensia, 3 (London: Royal Historical 
Society, 1906), 117f. The text appears corrupt in more than one place, but the sense is sufficiently 
clear. 

14 One might suggest that the term nigromantia not be re-Graecicized as ‘necromancy’ but left as 
‘nigromancy’. While in some respects preferable, this usage would mistakenly suggest that medieval 
usage distinguished between two terms. Both DuCange’s Glossarium (s.v. nigromantia) and the 
Oxford English Dictionary (s.v. ‘necromancy’) make it clear that nigromantia was not a term distinct 
from necromantia, but an alternative version of the same word, influenced by the Latin niger. Dives 
and Pauper, for example, is quoted as reading (in the 1496 printing), ‘nygromancye, that is 
wytchecrafte done by deed bodyes’. The equivalence thus conflated ‘black divination’ (construed 
broadly with reference to the magical arts in general, but at least by implication these arts conceived 
as demonic) with ‘divination by consulting the dead’. The first part of the word was also at times 
spelled nygro-, negre-, egra-, etc. 

15 On this ‘clerical underworld’ see Richard Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages (Cambridge: 
Cambridge Univeristy Press, 1989), esp. 153-6. 

16 Hjalmar Crohns, ‘Die Summa theologica des Antonin von Florenz und die Schatzung des 
Weibes im Hexenhammer’, Acta Societatis Scientiarum Fennicae, 32/4 (Helsingfors, 1903). 

17 See Lynn Thorndike, Michael Scot (London: Nelson, 1965), 120. 

18 Mariano da Alatri, ‘L’inquisizione a Firenze negli anni 1344/46 da un’istruttoria contro Pietro 
da l’Aquila’, in Isidorus a Villapadiema, ed., Miscellanea Melchor de Pohladura, 1 (Rome: 
Institutum Historicum O.F.M. Cap., 1964), 225-49. 

19 On the relationship between licit and illicit charms, see, e.g., Thomas Aquinas, Summa 
theologiae , II/II, q. 96, a. 4, and the comments of Heinrich Kramer (traditionally ascribed to him and 
Jakob Sprenger) in The Malleus maleficarum, ii.2.6, trans. Montague Summers (London: Pushkin, 
1948), 179-88. Johannes Nider, in his Praeceptorium divinae legis, summarized in Henry Charles 
Lea, Materials Toward a History of Witchcraft, ed. George Lincoln Burr, 1 (Philadelphia: University 
of Pennsylvania Press, 1939), 269fi, explains that it is licit to adjure demons in an imperative mode 
but not in the deprecatory mode that he associates (incorrectly) with necromancers. 


20 Jacques Paviot, ‘Note sur un cas de sorcellerie a Dijon en 1463’, Annales de Bourgogne, 65 
(1993), 43-5. 

21 G.G. Coulton, trans., Life in the Middle Ages, 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1928), 162-63, from the Grandes Chroniques de St Denis, vol. 5, 269. 

22 Duffy, The Stripping of the Altars, 266-87. 

23 Frederic C. Tubach, Index exemplorum: A Handbook of Medieval Religious Tales (FF 
Communications, 204) (Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, Akademia Scientiarum Fennica, 
1969), 61, no. 737. 

24 For a list of possible explanations for the failure of magic, at least in one cultural setting, see 
E.E. Evans-Pritchard, Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic among the Azande (Oxford: Clarendon, 1937), 
475-8. 

25 There are two copies in Clm 849, on 52r-59v and 135r-139r, and both are edited below. In 
addition, there is fragmentary version in Bodleian Library Rawlinson MS D252, 85r-87v, and a 
French Livre de consecracion in Trinity College Cambridge MS 0.8.29, fols 183r-186v. 

26 Jean Gerson, CEvres completes, ed. Palemon Glorieux (Paris: Desclee, 1961-73), 10, pp. 86- 
90. 

27 For example, Paul Diepgen, in ‘Amaldus de Villanova De improbatione maleficiorum’, Archiv 
fur Kulturgeschichte, 9 (1912), 385-403, clearly had no notion what necromancy entailed and was 
thus seriously mistaken regarding the intent of Amald’s work. 

28 Giovanni Boccaccio, The Decameron, trans. Mark Musa and Peter Bondanella (New York: 
Mentor, 1982), 7.3, 7.5 (involving an alleged priest), 8.7 (involving a scholar) and 9.10. 

29 See Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages, ch. 7. 

30 Guido Ruggiero, Binding Passions: Tales of Magic, Marriage, and Power at the End of the 
Renaissance (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), 211, 227. 

31 E.g., Hansen, Quellen, 524-26, and Carl Buxtorf-Falkeisen, Baslerische Stadt- und 
Landesgeschichten aus dem sechszehnten Jahrhundert (Basle: Schweighausen, 1863-8), vol. 4, 1-25. 

32 Duffy, The Stripping of the Altars, Ch. 6, is surely correct in arguing that knowledge of 
Latin was shared in varying degree by diverse sections of the population, and was not exclusive 
to the clergy. It is not the language of necromancy alone, but the command of ritual vocabulary 
and the assumption of entitlement to use that vocabulary that suggests the necromancers were 
primarily clerical, and this assumption is confirmed by images of the clerical necromancer 
found in literature as well as in the judicial records. 

33 For discussion of a range of issues in the theory of ritual see Roy A. Rappaport, ‘The 
obvious aspects of ritual’, in Roy A. Rappaport, Ecology, Meaning and Religion (Richmond, 
CA: North Atlantic Books, 1979), 173-221. 

34 Emile Durkheim, The Elementary Forms of Religious Life, trans. Karen E. Fields (New 
York: Free Press, 1995), esp. 39-44; M. Mauss, A General Theory of Magic, trans. R. Brain 
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1950). 

35 Duffy, The Stripping of the Altars, ch. 8. 

36 Ludwig Wittgenstein, Remarks on Frazer’s ‘Golden Bough VBemerkungen iiber Frazer’s 
‘Golden Bough’, ed. Rush Rhees, trans. A.C. Miles (Retsford: Brynmill, 1979) (‘Die Magie aber 
bringt einen Wunsch zur Darstellung; sie auflert einen Wunsch’), discussed in Stanley Jeyaraja 
Tambiah, Magic, Science, Religion, and the Scope of Rationality (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1990), 54-63, and in Rodney Needham, Exemplars (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1985), 149-77. 


37 Joseph Gusfield, Symbolic Crusade: Status Politics and the American Temperance Movement, 
2nd edn (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1986), 21. 

38 On this point see Richard Kieckhefer, ‘The specific rationality of medieval magic’, American 
Historical Review, 99 (1994), 813-36. 

39 See, for example, the case of Niccolo Consigli, in Gene A. Brucker, ed., The Society of 
Renaissance Florence: A Documentary Study (New York: Harper & Row, 1971), 361-6. 

40 Kieckhefer, ‘The specific rationality’, 813-36. 

44 Invoking an angel established as unfallen, such as the archangels Michael or Gabriel, could be 
superstitious if the means of invocation were inappropriate (e.g., if one used circles and conjurations 
in calling upon them) but would not thereby have qualified as magical by medieval definitions. 

42 Jacques Chiffoleau, La comptabilite de I’au-dela: les homines, la mort et la religion dans la 
region d’Avignon a la fin du Moven Age (vers 1320—vers 1480) (Rome: Ecole franqaise de Rome, 
1980), 389, n. 92; translation from R.N. Swanson, Religion and Devotion in Europe, c. 1215-c. 1515 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 188. 

43 Stanley J. Tambiah, ‘The magical power of words’, Man, n.s. 3 (1968), 175-208; also in 
Stanley J. Tambiah, Culture, Thought and Social Action (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1985), 17-59. 

44 For an overview of the subject see Richard Kieckhefer, ‘Major currents in late medieval 
devotion’, in Jill Raitt, ed., Christian Spirituality, 2 (New York: Crossroad, 1987), 75-108. 


2 

The Munich Handbook of 
Necromancy: Clm 849 


I n other areas of medieval studies, the ‘new philology’ is urging renewed 
attention to particular manuscripts, with respect for their variant readings of 
texts as well as attention to their physical make-up, evidence of the ways they 
were used, the disposition of text on the page, and the relationship between text 
and images. The individual manuscript actually put together by medieval hands 
and used by medieval readers, rather than the artificial standardized edition, is 
increasingly seen as a means for understanding how texts functioned within their 
historical culture. 1 In the same vein, I wish to propose that for the history of 
magic - especially in the late Middle Ages - what we need most is a series of 
detailed studies of particular representative manuscripts. This more than any 
other type of study will contribute toward a concrete and realistic sense of how 
magicians conceived and represented their art, especially if it is possible to 
divine the process by which a manuscript was compiled, and to say something 
about the mentality of the compiler as it changed through different stages of 
compilation. 

Clearly there were those in late medieval Europe whose interest in magic was 
more theoretical than practical. The monk of Sulby mentioned in Chapter 1 
claimed that his fascination with the occult was purely theoretical or speculative. 
We know that William of Auvergne and Nicholas Eymericus studied works of 
magic in the interest of analysing them, refuting their assumptions, and 
condemning them more effectively, while Albert the Great and Roger Bacon had 
theoretical interests in the occult that grew in large part out of their scientific 
research. There may well have been many less known figures who took a keen 
interest in knowing about magic through widely disseminated books such as 
Picatrix, even if they did not intend to practise this learning. 1 

