SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 20/39  |  CHARS: 455705-480342 of 925451
============================================================

opulus tuns, domine, donee 
pertranceat [sic]populus tuns [sz'c] iste quempossedisti, etc .... (Cf. 124r-124v.) 

5 In the Vulgate, Song of Songs 2:7, Adiuro vos, filiae Hierusalem, per capreas cervosque camporum, 
ne suscitetis neque evigilare faciatis dilectam. 

6 C. Stephen Jaeger, The Origins of Courtliness: Civilizing Trends and the Formation of Courtly Ideals, 
939-1210 (Philadelphia, 1985), 238, citing Nicetius, Epistulae Austrasicae, in MGH Epp. Merow. et Karol, 
aev., 1/3/9, 119-22. 

7 Charles Plummer, ed., Vitae sanctorum Hiberniae, 1 (Oxford: Clarendon, 1910), 143: ilia bestia 
fugata ad persequentem se uoce humana dixit: ‘Adiuro te in nomine Brigide, uirginis Hibernensis, ut me 
dimittas. ’ 

8 M.R. James, ‘Twelve medieval ghost-stories’, English Historical Review, 37 (1922), 413-22 (no. 3). 
On these cases see Jean-Claude Schmitt, Les revenants: les vivants et les morts dans la societe medievale 
(Paris: Gallimard, 1994), 168-73. 

9 Michael D. Swartz, ‘Scribal magic and its rhetoric: formal patterns in medieval Hebrew and Aramaic 


incantation texts from the Cairo Genizah’, Har\>ard Theological Review, 83 (1990), 163-80. 

lORawl. 19r-20r, 124v, 139r-142r, 151v, 155r-156r; 148r-149r; 153r. 

11 Martin Buber, I and Thou, 2nd edn, trans. Ronald Gregor Smith (New York: Scribner, 1958), 83. 

12 See Richard Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 
78-80. 

J_3 See Iohannes de Francofordia, Quaestio, utrum potestas cohercendi demonis fieri possit per 
caracteres, figuras atque verborum prolationes (1412), in Joseph Hansen, ed., Quellen und Untersuchungen 
zur Geschichte des Hexenwahns und der Hexenverfolgung im Mittelalter (Bonn: Georgi, 1901; repr. 
Hildesheim: Olms, 1963), 71-82. See also the conclusions of the Paris theologians, from 1398, in Jean 
Gerson, CEuvres completes, ed. Palemon Glorieux (Paris: Descle, 1961-73), vol. 10, p. 89: article 17 
condemns the belief ‘That by such arts demons are truly coerced and compelled and do not feign such 
compulsion to seduce people’. 

]A Precipio vobis occurs six times (e.g., no. 38 and no. 39); adiuro vos/te twice; exorzizo te, voco vos, 
invoco vos, and absoluo vos also occur. 

15 Te invoco et adiuro (no. 14); coniuro vos et precipio vobis (no. 39). 

16 No. 27 (five times in a single conjuration), no. 39 (eleven times). 

17 No. 12 ( coniuro ... coniuro te ... coniuro vos et exorcizo vos [ et] impero vobis)', no. 39 ( coniuro vos 
... coniuro et contestor vos ... adiuro vos followed by eight more occurrences of coniuro vos); no. 8 (vos 
coniuro et exorcizo, et prouoco vos ... coniuro vos ... coniuro vos et impero atque precipio vobis ... vos 
advoco); no. 15 (vos potenter invoco ... vos invoco et coniuro potenter et exorziso ... vos invoco et coniuro 
et exorcizo et constringo); no. 33 (vos exorcisamus atque imperamus ... exorcizamus atque viriliter 
imperamus); no. 11 (invoco vos ex parte Patris, prouoco vos ex parte Filij, invoco vos ex parte Spiritus 
Sancti). Further examples: coniuro vos et advoco, followed by coniuro vos twice; coniuro vos six times, 
followed by precipio vobis; vos exorciso et coniuro ... coniuro vos; vos coniuro et exorcizo et invoco ... 
coniuro vos ... coniuro vos et exorcizo; vos coniuro ... coniuro vos ... precipio vobis; vobis precipio ... 
precipio vobis; coniuro vos ... precipio vobis; vobis impero et precipio et coniuro ... coniuro vos. 

18 No. 1 (supplico vobis and te deprecor); no. 4 (vos deprecot; vobis supplico, vos rogito); no. 22 (te 
deprecor); no. 23 (te exoramus); no. 24 (rogo ... rogo vos); no. 29 (te deprecor); no. 41 (precor te ... vocor 
et contestor and precor, rogo, etpeto). 

19 E.g., no. 6 (rogo vos, coniuro et adiuro). no. 15 uses the forms coniuro et constringo te; te invoco, 
coniuro, et constringo, and te invoco et coniuro et constringo. 

20 Both from no. 10; the latter reads Coniuro vos, omnes demones scriptos in hoc anulo. 

21 No. 39 and no. 40. 

22 No. 23. 

23 In no. 27 he is addressed several times by that designation and also as simply virgo or infans. 

24 Nos 4 (ymago), 11 (cappa), 24 (O vos sanctissima nomina). no. 40 addresses Jaspai; Balthasar, 
Melchior, Smoagel, Emanuel, et deus fiords, but this appears to be a mistake; these names should appear in 
invocations rather than in an address. 

25 Addressed as eque bone in nos 17 and 43. 

26 A conjuration in experiment no. 38 has thirty-four, one in no. 40 has forty-six, one in no. 33 has 
forty-nine, and one in no. 39 has fifty-eight. 

27 Eamon Duffy, The Stripping of the Altars: Traditional Religion in England, c. 1400— c. 1580 (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), 262f. 

28 Cf. The Commonplace Book of Robert Revnes of Acle: An Edition of Tanner MS 407, ed. Cameron 
Louis (New York: Garland, 1980), 169-70. 


29 Nos 1, 10, 13, 14 (where it is called the nomen altissimum ), 25, 27, 28, 33 (where it is said to have 
been used by Abraham) and 35. On the Jewish background for magical use of the divine name see K. 
Kohler, ‘The Tetragrammaton (Shem ham-M’forash) and its uses’, Journal of Jewish Lore and Philosophy, 
1 (1919), 19-32. 

30 Compare the wording of the conjuration in Bodleian Library MS Rawlinson D 252, fols 87v-89v. 

31 Nos 33 (AGLA); 39 (Theos); 28 (Yschiros); 28 and 33 (Athanatos); 28 (Eleyson); 14, 23, 27, 28, 33 
(On); 25 (Hon); 28, 33 (Pancraton); 39 (Panthocrathon). One of the more extraordinary invocations is per 
legem legalem et per spem sperantem et per karitatem karitatiuam (no. 14), presumably an adaptation or 
garbling of the three theological virtues. 

32 Joseph Kaster, trans. and ed., The Wings of the Falcon (New York, 1968), 60. 

33 On the lore of Virgil see Domenico Comparetti, Vergil in the Middle Ages, trans. E.F.M. Benecke 
(London: Swan Sonnenschein, 1895), and J.W. Spargo, Virgil the Necromancer (Cambridge, MA, 1934). 

34 See esp. F.C. Conybeare, ‘The Testament of Solomon’, Jewish Quarterly Review, 11 (1899), 1-45, 
but also John M. Hull, Hellenistic Magic and the Synoptic Tradition (Naperville, IL: Allenson, 1974), 30- 
35. 

35 E.g., no. 20. 

36 Fols 141r-141v. 

37 Rawl. MS D 252, fols 16v-17v„ 72r-72v. 

38 E.g., nos 27, 35, 40. 

39 No. 25, vt non recedatis ... quousque certificati fuerimus de omni re dubitabili; no. 27, vt non 
habeatis licenciam recedendi ... donee ... michi dicatis ... veritatem, and vt non habeatis potestatem 
recedendi ... donee ... meam voluntatem adimpleueritis, and vt virtutem talem recipias quod quocumque 
fueris ligata, ipsi spiritus non habeant potestatem recedendi quousque velle ligatoris perficiant). They may 
also be used to ensure that the spirits will repeat the desired effect on later occasions, at the master’s will 
(no. 9, vt iurare vos debeatis vt predictum equum semper ad me venire cogetis). The term ‘bond’ {hoc 
vinculum est legendum ) occurs in no. 33. 

40 E.g., Rawlinson D 252, 4v, 43v {coniuracio obediencialis) and 12r, 14v, and 36v {coniuracio 
licencialis). 

44 Nos 1, 6, 8, and 9. Also nos 7 and 9, quatenus ...ad me venire debeatis, and vt hie venire debeatis', 
and no. 11, quatenus ... hue venire debeatis. 

42 Nos 1, 6, and 13. Also no. 24, vt mittatis ... angelos ... qui dicant michi veritatem; no. 27, vt ... vadas 
pro rege tuo et facias eum venire; no. 38, vt vestrum vnus ... veniat vt iste puer possit eum ... videre; no. 41, 
vt michi spiritual veritatis ... mittere digneris. 

43 Nos 5, 13, and 35. Also no. 2, vt eatis ... et relinquatis talem in statu priori, and vt ... [talem] 
personam ... circuatis, et sensus eius ... affligatis; no. 4, vt ... ipsum [?] iuxta me taliter aligetis, vt me ... 
veneretur; and no. 5, quatenus ... odium ... inseratis. 

44 Nos 22, 24, 27, and 38. Also no. 38, vt michi sitis obedientes et isto puero ... quod verum est ... 
dicatis, and no. 39, quod ... ostendatis et dicetis huicpuero ... vbi acceptum uel recondition sit hoc furtum. 

45 No. 22, quatenus isti puero tribuas scienciam et intellection, vt michi veritatem annunciet; no. 29, 
illumina istius pueri cor [et] mentem, et fac vt michi veritatem ... dicat ... vt [?] indicet omnia, and vt isti 
puero tribuas scienciam et intellectum, vt michi veritatem ... dicat; no. 38, vt ... iste puer ... possit videre 
furem cum fur to; no. 39, quod vobis detis auctoritatem huic puero ... audiendi, interrogandi, et videndi, and 
vt ... vngwem Indus pueri ... crescere et clarescere faciatis ... vt apparere possit ... et videre in eo furem et 
furtum; no. 40, vt ...faciatis vngwem istius pueri ... crescere et clarescere ... quod iste puer ... in eo videre 
possit furem uel fures et furtum. 


46 No. 27. 

47 Nos 33, 3, 43, 15,39,40. 

48 No. 27; cf. no. 22. 

49 Nos 23, 27,28, 29,33. 

50. Nos 10, 15, 10,39. 

51 Nos 14, 15, 17, and 43. 

52 The conjuration on fols 59v-69v is abbreviated; the full text is given on fols 109r—118r and 139r- 
146r. Compare the conjuration in Bodleian Library MS Rawlinson D 252, fols 24r-29r. 

53 For parallels see Marvin Meyer and Richard Smith, eds, Ancient Christian Magic: Coptic Texts oj 
Ritual Power (1994), 157, and Raster, Wings of the Falcon, 151-2. See also Malleus maleficarum, ii.1.13, 
p. 141. 

54 Fols 115v and 144r, Alioquin exorcizo te ut cathene pen ales tue fecundantur [or, on 144r, perhaps 
secundantur] sulphure etpice. 

55 Fols 111 v—118r and 141r-146r. 

56 Adolf Franz, Die kirchlichen Benediktionen im Mittelalter, 2 (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1909), 587-96. 

57 Coniuratio malignorum spirituum in corporibus hominum existentium prout in Sancto Petro (Rome: 
Stephan Plannck, ca. 1492; also Rome: Eucharius Silber, ca. 1495, and other editions). 

58 Clm 849, fols 109r-109v, 139v. 

59 British Library, MS Sloane 962, fols 9v—lOr: In nomine patris, et filii, et spiritus sancti, amen. 
Coniuro uos elues et omnia genera demonum nocturna siue diuturna per patrem, et filium, et spiritum 
sanctum, atque indiuiduam trinitatem, et per intercessionem beatissime et gloriose semperque virginis 
Marie, per oraciones prophetarum, per merita patriarcharum, per suffragia angelorum et archangelorum, 
per int[er?]uentum apostolorum, per passionem martyrum, perfidem confessorum, per castitatem virginum, 
et per intercessionem omnium sanctorum, et per septem dormientes, hos quorum nomina sunt hec: Malchus, 
Maximianus, Dionisius, Iohennes, Constantinus, Seraphion, Martimanus, et per nomen domini dei quod est 
benediction in secula ix*A 4< G 43 L 4* A 4m >t non noceatis neque aliquid mali faciatis vel inferatis huic 
famulo dei N. neque dormiendo neque vigilando. 4 1 Christus uicit [sic] 4 1 Christus regnat 4< Christus 
imperat 4< Christus nos benedicat 4< [et] ab omni malo deffendat 4< Amen. In nomine patris, et filii, et 
spiritus sancti, amen. 4< In nomine meo demonia eicient, Unguis loquentur nouis, serpentes tollent, et si 
mortiferum quid biberint non eis nocebit, super egros manos imponent et bene habebunt. 4< Crux 
admirabilis, euacuacio doloris, restitucio sanitatis. 4< Ecce crucem domini, fugite partes [sic?] adverse. 4< 
Vicit leo de tribu iuda, radix Dauid [Apoc 5:5] allam [sic?]. 4< Christus vincit 43 Christus regnat 4< Christus 
imperat 4< Christus hunc famulum dei N. ab omni fantasia et ab omni vexacione diaboli et ab omni malo 
omni hora et vbique per virtutem sancte crucis deffendat 4< Amen 4< agios 4< hyskyros 43 athanathos 4< 
eleyson 4 1 . 

60 Fol. lOr: Contra malignos spiritus. Audi maledicte Sathana, adiuro te per nomen eterni dei et 
saluatoris nostri filij eius Ihesu Christi, cum tua victus inuidia, tremens gemensque, discede. Nichil tibi 
neque angelis tuis sit commune cum famulo dei N., neque noceas ei, neque appareas coram illo visibiliter, 
sompniendo neque vigilando, et iterum coniuro vos demones siue spiritus malignos, quicumque sitis, per 
aspercionem sanguinis Ihesu Christi in cruce, et eius vulnera cruentata. Et iterum coniuro vos per mortem 
Ihesu Christi in cruce et spiritus emissionem, qui ad infernum descendit et Hum spoliauit, vt nunc et a modo 
semper fugiatis ab hoc famulo dei N. et nunquam in eum introeatis sed exeatis et recedatis ab eo. Et iterum 
coniuro vos per virtutem verborum istorum infrascriptorum hie [MS hod], si infra eum sis vel sitis, vt 
exeas vel exeatis, si plures sitis, ab illo vt nullum a modo habeat terrorem neque vexacionem. Hoc vos 
cogat, verbum earn factum 4 1 crux Christi sancta [MS sancea or santea], claui, corona spinea in sanguine 
agni dei in miceperfusa, saluent ei, deffendant hie et vbique ferentem [sic] ista ab omni aduersitate diaboli 


el peruersa. In nomine paths, etc. 

61 Franz, Die kirchlichen Benediktionen, 2, p. 573. 

62 Gene A. Brucker, ed., The Society of Renaissance Florence: A Documentary Study (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1971), 261-6; Gene A. Brucker, ‘Sorcery in early Renaissance Florence’, Studies in the 
Renaissance, 10 (1963), 13-16, 22f. 

63 Andre Goddu, ‘The failure of exorcism in the Middle Ages’, in A. Zimmermann, ed., Soziale 
Ordnungen im Selbstverstdndnis des Mittelalters (Berlin, 1980), 540-57. 

64 Nancy Caciola, ‘Discerning Spirits: Sanctity and Possession in the Later Middle Ages’ (University of 
Michigan dissertation, 1994), Ch. V: ‘Exorcism from spectacle to ritual’. 


7 

Demons and Daimons: 
The Spirits Conjured 


I n his recent study of late Byzantine demonology, Richard Greenfield 
distinguishes between a ‘standard orthodox’ tradition of demonology and 
‘alternative’ traditions. The former sees demons as immaterial, as ranked 
under a single chief (Satan, the Devil), and as acting only with God’s permission 
or through illusion (which they use because, weakened by Christ, they must dupe 
humans into believing they still wield power). The latter ascribe some degree of 
materiality to them, classify them in various hierarchies with multiple leaders, 
and ascribe some power to the demons themselves. 1 Greenfield says that in the 
alternative traditions, ‘it is always assumed that the demons are free to obey the 
practitioner or are capable of doing what he wants as long as sufficient or 
coercion is provided. There is no suggestion that they can only do so if allowed 
to by God for the ends of divine providence or economy, the state of affairs 
required by standard belief - indeed, many of the purposes for which they are 
employed would seem to be most inappropriate, if not actually contradictory to 
normal Christian concepts of God’s purposes.’ 2 Greenfield does not mean to 
suggest a clear or sharp dichotomy, but rather a strong difference in tendency 
between the theological purists and those with alternative and at least implicitly 
non-orthodox views. 

With perhaps some differences in nuance, one can make the same rough 
distinction for the later medieval West as well, and some if not all of the specific 
contrasts that Greenfield isolates would apply in the West. Most fundamentally, 
one can discern - in the Munich manuscript, as in Western magic generally - a 
tension between the early Christian notion of demons as fallen angels, whose 
status is determined by their free moral act of rebellion against God, and the 
Graeco-Roman conception of daimones (or daemones in Latin) as spirits linked 
with the world of nature, whose status is fixed by their natural position within 
the hierarchy of beings. Apuleius’s De deo Socratis remained long influential in 
Christian tradition, despite its incongruence with the notion of demons as fallen 


angels; for Apuleius, daemones were rational beings whose natural sphere was 
the sublunary air, just as gods and humans are rational beings residing in the 
ether and on earth respectively. They are not naturally evil, but may be either 
good or evil.- The conjurations of late medieval necromancers, resembling as 
they do the exorcisms intended for the possessed, presuppose that the spirits in 
question are the same sort of fallen ones that Christ expelled from the 
energumens of first-century Palestine. But intermingled with references to such 
manifestly maleficent beings are notions of benign or neutral spirits, neither 
angels nor demons in classical Christian terms, a category not recognized in the 
orthodox theology of the late Middle Ages.- One might thus say that the 
conjurations betray a tension between ‘demonology’ and what we might call 
‘daimonology’. 

Theologians as well as necromancers believed that the demons held various 
ranks, in a kind of hierarchy that parodied that of God’s heavenly court, or rather 
a ‘Lowerarchy’, as C.S. Lewis called it.- The notion of a demonic hierarchy, with 
a multiplicity of named and ranked spirits, stems chiefly from the Neoplatonists, 
and above all Iamblichus. Proclus, drawing on Iamblichus’s elaborate 
categorization, spoke of daimones as ruling the fire, the air, the water, the earth 
and the underground region; to this system Psellus added lucifugues (or light- 
fleeing) demons, and Johannes Trithemius lent the weight of his authority to this 
system.- The basic notion became part of mainstream theological tradition: that 
demons are organized into an infernal parody of the celestial hierarchy is an 
assumption that the Malleus maleficarum shared with Thomas Aquinas. 2 For the 
later medieval West, at least, one thus cannot speak of such conceptions as part 
of an alternative tradition, although it is true that a fascination with the details of 
the infernal hierarchy was left to the fringes of the theological community. 

Altogether 189 spirits are addressed by name in the Munich handbook’s 
conjurations, of whom 88 are referred to expressly as demones. Further 
specification is common: ‘malign demons’; ‘most inimical spirits’; ‘all hateful 
and malign, invidious and discordant demons’; ‘arms-bearing [or squire] spirits, 
whose role it is to bear arms and ... deceive human senses’; ‘spirits who dwell in 
the water [and] endanger ships’; ‘spirits who attend to sinners’; ‘infernal spirits’; 
‘fornicator, tempter, seducer, possessor of humans’.- In short, the compiler of 
this manual was far from squeamish about invoking clearly and explicitly fallen 
angels. 

The conjurations of the Munich handbook sometimes refer to demons by their 
rank in the infernal hierarchy: five are ‘princes of the demons’; three are 


powerful, magnificent, and illustrious spirits; Bartha is a king; Baltim, Galtim, 
and Saltim are dukes; Belial is ‘foremost prince’; seven demons are ‘subjects’ of 
Lytim.- On rare occasion the spirits referred to in the Munich handbook are 
clearly conceived as unfallen - a claim that would elicit skepticism from 
orthodox authorities. Experiments no. 24 and no. 25 both refer to ‘angels’, and in 
other cases as well the characterizations could be taken as implying unfallen 
angels: ‘most benign spirits, who sow concord’; ‘most pleasant, happy, joyful 
spirits’; ‘powerful, magnificent, and illustrious spirits, in whom 1 place full 
trust’.- In two experiments the spirit addressed is named Orient, and in both 
cases he is explicitly conceived as a benevolent figure: he is addressed, ‘O most 
high and benign king Orient’, ‘O benign Orient, maker of the greater part of the 
world, heaven, and earth, at whose command all things on heaven and on earth 
were wisely made’.- It would be hazardous to posit a direct connection here 
with the goddess-figure Oriente said to have been venerated in the territory of 
Milan in the late fourteenth century,- but in both cases the traditional medieval 
primacy of the direction east obviously lies behind the construction of a chief 
deity. In several experiments God himself is addressed: ‘God, creator of all 
things’; ‘Almighty, everlasting God, Lord Jesus Christ’; ‘God of heaven, God of 
earth, God of the angels, God of the archangels, you who are king of all the 
saints, the patriarchs, and the prophets’; ‘Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living 
God, who, according to the will of the Lather, with the cooperation of the Holy 
Spirit, by your death gave life to the world’; and ‘King of Kings and Lord of 
Lords, eternal and unchanging Lord God’.- 

Sometimes the nature of the spirit addressed cannot be determined. In one 
case the subject of the address is the indeterminate ‘N.’ (no. 12), and elsewhere 
the spirit who appears to a boy is addressed simply as ‘you who are before me’ 
(no. 27). Another experiment provides a conjuration with the indeterminate 
address, ‘O so-and-so, of thus-and-such an order’ (no. 1). 

A few of the experiments list demons whose names are familiar from other 
sources: Astaroth, Baruch, Belial, Belzebub, Berith, Castiel, Lucifer, Mirael, 
Paymon and Satan or Sathan.- The experiments that list such familiar spirits do 
not restrict themselves to these, however, but also address less familiar or 
entirely unfamiliar names: one conjures not only Belzebub, Berith, Lucifer and 
Sathan, but also Apolin, Beliath and Maraloch; another addresses not only 
Mirael and Astaroth but also Belferith, Camoy, Noryoth, Ocel, Oreoth, Pinen, 
Sismael, Sobronoy and Tryboy; a third gives the altogether well established 
name Satan (spelled ‘Sathan’) but also the exceptional ones Altramat, 


Archidemath, Discobermath, Fritath, Hegergibet, Helyberp, Pestiferat and Sona; 
a fourth lists not only Berith, Belzebub and Astaroth, but also Althes, Cormes, 
Dies, Diles, Dilia, Fabar, Felsmes, Mithiomo, Molbet, Natheus, Onaris, Pist, 
Progemon, Thobar, Vmon and Vralchim.- In some cases the names listed could 
be corrupt or variant forms of more familiar ones: Apolin could be Apollion, 
Arath could be Arathiel, Astra could be Astrael, Damay could be Dahnay, Erlain 
could be Erel(l)im, Gana could be Ganael, Gebel could be Gebiel, Lamair could 
be Lama, Oor could be Or, Safrit could be Safriel, Tami could be Tamiel, Taraor 
could be Tara, Tatomofon could be Tatonon, Thomo could be Thomax, Ym 
could be Im, and Zanno or Zaimo could be Zainon.- Even so, of the 189 names 
addressed in the conjurations, only 17 per cent at most seem to be well 
established ones. Of the eleven spirits named in experiment no. 34, only Curson 
has broad currency (unless Hanni is equated with Haniel). When the list of 
spirits in this manual is compared with that in Picatrix, what is striking is the 
singular lack of correspondence. 

The crucial question for the necromancers of Western Europe is whether the 
demons can be compelled to appear, and their own assumption - that the demons 
can be so compelled, but only with God’s permission and aid - is not 
fundamentally different from the assumption that underlies orthodox exorcism 
and mainstream theology. John of Frankfurt devoted a treatise in 1412 to the 
question, ‘whether it is possible to have the power of coercing a demon through 
characters, figures, and recitation of words’ ( utrum potestas cohercendi demonis 
fieri possit per caracteres, figuras atque verborum prolationes ), and he insisted 
that it was not - that the demons may pretend to be compelled only to lure the 
conjurers deeper into their own perfidy, but that they come, if at all, of their own 
free will.— He seems not to have taken fully into account that the necromancers, 
exactly like orthodox exorcists, claimed the power of coercing demons 
specifically with divine aid. To be sure, their goals were at variance with 
orthodox morality, yet they saw their appeal to sacred powers as itself a sacred 
activity, and if it led to the killing and coercion of other individuals, that did not 
sway them from this conviction.- In any event, while their critics and judges 
saw the necromancers as in league with the demons, they perceived themselves 
as calling upon God to help them control and exploit the spirits. 

One reason it appeared to critics that the necromancers were bound to the 
spirits they conjured, rather than vice versa, is that they seemed to make sacrifice 
to these spirits: fumigations and other acts could readily be seen as sacrifices. 
Nicholas Eymericus explains that some conjurers exhibit the honour of latria to 


the demons they invoke by sacrificing to them, adoring them, reciting execrable 
prayers to them, dedicating themselves and promising obedience to the demons, 
swearing by them and adjuring one demon by the name of a higher one, singing 
songs in their honour, genuflecting and making prostrations, observing chastity 
out of respect for them, fasting and otherwise macerating the flesh in their 
honour, wearing black or white out of reverence to them, using characters and 
unknown names, lighting lamps and offering fumigations, sacrificing birds and 
beasts and even their own blood, and so forth.- 

