SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 14/39  |  CHARS: 310392-335337 of 925451
============================================================

anger - and probably the chief reason for judicial action against 


the diviners - was that of false accusation. One is not surprised to read in 
the Rawlinson necromantic manuscript, which is devoted mainly to this 
kind of magic, that the spirits must be strictly enjoined not to defame any 
innocent parties.- The point is made forcefully in a story from Stephen of 
Bourbon, who does not hesitate to ascribe a diviner’s revelation to demons, 
but argues how little the spirits can be trusted: 

While I was a student at Paris, one Christmas Eve when our companions 
were at Vespers, a certain most noted thief entered our hostel, and, 
opening the chamber of one of our fellows, carried off many volumes of 
law-books. The scholar would have studied in his books after the feast; 
and, finding them not, he hastened to the wizards, of whom many failed 
him, but one wrought as follows. Adjuring his demons and holding a 
sword, he made the boy gaze upon the blade; and he, after many things 
there seen, beheld at last by a succession of many visions how his books 
were stolen by one of our fellows, his own cousin, whom he thought the 
most upright of our fellowship; whom the possessor of the books 
slandered not only among the scholars but also among his friends, 
accusing him that he had stolen them. Meanwhile the aforesaid thief stole 
other things and was detected, whereupon he fled to a certain church 
where he lay in the belfry, and, having been duly examined, confessed all 
that he had stolen, and where, and what he had done with his thefts. 
When therefore certain scholars who lodged hard by our hostel had 
found by his means a mantle which they had lost and he had stolen, then 
he who had lost his books could scarce rest until he had gone to enquire 
of this thief; who answered and told him when and where he had taken 
his books, and the Jew’s house where he had pledged them, where also 
my friend found them. This 1 have told that ye may clearly mark the 
falsehood of those demons who showed the vision in the sword-blade in 
order that they might slander that good man and break the bonds of 
charity between those kinsfolk, and bring the man who believed in them 
to eternal perdition, both him and his.- 

Not surprisingly, the diviners themselves could be subject to prosecution 
on the ground of false accusation, as when the sum of £40 was stolen from 
John Haddon of Coventry in the mid-1480s, and he consulted necromancers 
to find the thieves; they charged one William Lee, a poor man, who had 


been seen wearing the same garments that the necromancers had determined 
were worn by the guilty parties. Lee petitioned on his own behalf, pleading 
that the accusation rested on false and illicit proceedings: 

Humbly showeth and pitiously complaineth unto your good lordship 
your daily orator William Lee of the city of Coventry, that where forty 
pounds of money was taken and withdrawn from one John Haddon of the 
said city, draper, as the said John hath reported and said, whereupon the 
said John, to get knowledge of the takers of the said money, caused 
certain persons using the crafts of sorcery, witchcrafts and necromancy 
[Nygromancy ] to inquire by their crafts of the takers of the said money, 
and thereupon the said persons using the said unlawful crafts advised and 
counseled the said John Haddon to take and examine your said orator for 
withdrawing of the said money, for as much as they perceived that your 
said orator used and wore such garments and clothing as they determined 
by their unlawful witchcrafts that the takers of the said money had and 
used at the time of the taking of the said money. And thereupon the said 
John Haddon, having no other cause against your said orator nor matter 
of suspicion, arrested and put in prison your said orator and kept him 
there by the space of a month and more. And after this the said John, 
having no other cause nor nothing of untruth could prove against your 
said orator, suffered him to depart and go at his large. And after this the 
said John Haddon, intending the further vexation and trouble of your said 
orator, made a plaint of trespass before the mayor and sheriffs of the said 
city against your said orator concerning the taking of the said money, 
supposing that your said orator the Wednesday next before the feast of 
the Annunciation of Our Lady last past took and bore away the said 
money. In the which plaint of trespass your said orator is like to be 
condemned, for as much as your said orator is in poverty and the said 
John Haddon is of great might and power and great alliance in the said 
city. Wherefore and for as much as the said cause of trespass and the said 
wrongful arresting and keeping of your said orator in prison was by 
means and judgment of the said persons using the said unlawful crafts of 
necromancy and witchcraft, to whom credence ought not to be given, for 
that is contrary to the faith of Holy Church. In consideration whereof that 
it would please your good lordship to grant a certiorare to be directed to 
the said mayor and sheriffs, etc.- 


Divinatory conjuration could, of course, be used for other purposes as 
well, such as finding buried treasure. A group of men were tried in Norfolk 
in 1465 for using necromancy to discover such a trove. Allegedly they 
invoked and made sacrifice to accursed spirits. When a spiritus aerialis 
appeared, at Bunwell, they promised it the body of a Christian man in 
exchange for its leading them to treasure; the spirit revealed in a crystal the 
location of a hill filled with treasure, whereupon the adventurers baptized a 
rooster with a Christian name and sacrificed it to the spirit.- Thomas Forde 
was sentenced to the pillory at London in 1418 for having defrauded women 
by claims of magical power: he had extorted money from one woman, and 
attempted to gain her hand in marriage, by suggesting he could determine 
where her late husband had buried a chest containing over £200; he had told 
another of his victims that he could recover for her the gold cloth that had 
been stolen from her.- Other cases too may have involved a substantial 
measure of straightforwardly cynical charlatanry, but in these instances it 
seems all the more apparent. It is magic of this sort that gives rise to jest in 
the tale of Mary of Nijmeghen, where the Devil boasts: 

I am beginning to teach people how to find hidden treasure; and only 
yesterday it cost one of them his life. 1 told him where there was a 
treasure hidden and growing mouldy, in a stable, underneath a beam on 
which the whole weight of the stable was resting. 1 told him that he 
would have to dig deep into the ground, and he would find pound upon 
pound of the hidden treasure. At once he started to dig there, but as soon 
as he had dug so far that he undermined the beam and the posts 
supporting it, the beam fell to the ground and crushed this poor idiot 
under it!— 


At least in cases for detection of thieves, however, otherwise responsible 
individuals seem rather often to have placed credence in the claims of the 
diviners, perhaps because they were desperate, and perhaps because what 
they really sought was a way of persuading others to support a suspicion 
they themselves already harboured. 

Divinatory experiments in the Munich handbook 

The largest number of experiments in Clm 849, nineteen in all, is divinatory. 
While it is sometimes said that these experiments may be used for any of 


various purposes, the usual end is detection of a crime or criminal (usually a 
thief, less often a murderer) and recovery of stolen goods, more rarely to 
determine the location of hidden treasure. The text of one experiment (no. 
25) insists that the procedure must not be used for any base or frivolous 
purpose, but only for a serious one, because one must not take the name of 
God in vain. 

As for the techniques used in these experiments, the characteristic 
features in most of them are two. First, the primary magical technique is 
scrying, combined with conjurations; magic circles either are not used or 
have little significance.- Second, cooperation of a medium, usually a young 
boy, is vital; it is he alone who actually sees the spirits that are conjured. 

Approximately half of these experiments entail the use of a circle or 
some other figure among the means for conjuring the spirits. The medium 
typically sees the spirits in a mirror, crystal, vessel, bone, polished 
thumbnail or fingernail. In most cases the medium must be a virginal boy, 
who actually sees and communicates with the spirits.- Sometimes we are 
told that he must be younger than twelve, and born of legitimate marriage.- 
Occasionally a girl may be used as well as a boy,- but this provision is 
relatively rare. The use of young and putatively innocent boys in divination 
must be seen as part of a broader clerical fascination with the ideal of 
innocent boyhood. In liturgical drama young boys dressed and acted ‘in the 
manner of virgin women’, at least in part ‘to project the theme of virginity’, 
as Nicholas Orme has phrased it.— 

The use of a medium could well be a means for expression of socially 
shared convictions about the likeliest suspects, but it is not entirely obvious 
that this mechanism came importantly into play. Because the ritual was 
private, it could more easily become a tool for the expression of individual 
prejudice and animosity. Yet the one who saw the visions was neither the 
client nor the master but instead a young boy, in all likelihood not one with 
a personal interest in the outcome of the experiment. Apart from the obvious 
matter of the youth’s sacred non-sexuality, his youth may have been 
important mainly because it put him at some remove from the preformed 
judgements of the adult principals and made possible a relatively neutral 
accusation. It is, of course, also possible that the mere pretence of childish 
innocence, neutrality and distance from adult biases was more important 
than any real immunity of this sort. 


Experiments involving mirrors 


In his account of scrying with a steel mirror, Johannes Hartlieb says, ‘I have 
seen masters who maintain they can prepare mirrors such that any man or 
woman can see in them what they will.’ He also says that other reflecting 
surfaces can be used; there are even priests who will use the very paten that 
serves at mass to hold the host; they believe (falsely, adds Hartlieb) that 
only angels and not demons can appear on such a consecrated object.- One 
might suppose that a mirror would make an ideal tool for divination that 
requires concentration on a reflective surface, because mirrors are designed 
specifically for reflection. A modern mirror, however, might be distinctly 
inappropriate for this purpose precisely because it reflects too well and too 
realistically, giving too little scope to imaginative play and the power of 
suggestion. Perhaps the mirrors used in divinatory experiments were less 
polished, but at least in some cases the magician is instructed to use a 
polished mirror. We must assume that the point was not for the child 
medium who gazed into the mirror to focus closely on his own face but to 
use the mirror as a means for perceiving more numinous revelations. To be 
sure, there are cultures in which the spectator’s own face reflected in a 
mirror becomes a point of reference for visionary encounter; after staring for 
hours at one’s own reflection one may identify one’s face with that of an 
ancestor, or one may perceive it as a manifestation of one’s own true, inner 
or archetypal self.- In the Munich manuscript, however, there is no 
suggestion that the medium’s own realistic image plays any role whatever. 

The handbook contains five such experiments: two versions of the Mirror 
of Floron (nos 18 and 19), the First Mirror of Filith (no. 23), and two others 
(nos 20 and 33). The Mirror of Floron in its first version may serve as a 
useful introduction to these experiments: 

Have a mirror made of pure steel, measuring one palm around, with a 
handle for holding it, and have it bright and shiny like a sword. And have 
it made in the name of Floron, and around the rim of the mirror, on the 
part that is not polished, have these ten names [Fatranoy, Iszarin, Bicol, 
Danmals, Gromon, Zara, Ralkal, Sigtonia, Samah and Meneglasar] 
inscribed with ten characters, with the name of the aforesaid spirit 
[Floron] written in the middle. After it has been made, it should be 
anointed with pure and bright balsam, and fumigated with aloes, 
ambergris, myrrh and white frankincense. 


When this has been done, the master of this work should sit and have 
this mirror held with both hands by a virgin boy before his chest. The 
master himself should be bathed and dressed in clean garments. Before 
he begins to exercise this work he should sprinkle in the air honey, milk 
and wine, mixed together in equal proportions, while saying, ‘O Floron, 
respond quickly in the mirror, as you are accustomed to appear.’ 

When he has said this, he should read this conjuration before the 
mirror: ‘Bismille araathe mem lismissa gassim gisim galisim darrgosim 
samaiaosim ralim ausini taxarim zaloimi hyacabanoy illete laytimi 
hehelmini betoymi thoma leminao vnuthomin zonim narabanorum 
azarethia thathitat hinanadon illemay sard lucacef illemegiptimi 
sitaginatim viaice hamtamice tatiala taltarini alaoht haleytum 
gaptametuntij morto orfail geibel huabaton albital hualepin halmagrilie 
hualeon huastanie hualtamemeth huatorzor illenie giptimi tatgnie 
gathegine lesuma lesanim aptasale albweroahit vlleath alfard vsemeth 
aptisile abfluwarth vllelath ant clulamoralie hahysitimi waleles lithimi 
caegine catliegineles mirabolamini abtasile albiwahith alleath halamaton 
vnitia gaytatalon huaia gay soze cemeselis phalmorath bethathure huaba 
lagis illemeammitimi gelgine gathegine lesmiraptalibe albiwath vleuth.’ 

When he has recited this conjuration, the master should look in the 
mirror, and he will see an armed knight seated on a horse, and his squire 
accompanying him. The knight will dismount from the horse and his 
squire will hold the horse. He will greet the knight [with the words], se 
desperata, decentissime visibiliter greciomo. And then the master may 
ask him about past, present and future things, and he will at once give 
full response in writing. 

This should not seem unbelievable to you, whoever may execute this 
work, for when you have carried out these things nine times this same 
spirit will clearly reveal face to face, orally, all things which previously 
he has indicated in writing. 

And so, when you have completed everything according to your will, 
command this spirit to withdraw in peace, and to return according to the 
command of his master when he is summoned. 


The second version of this Mirror of Floron adds certain details: the mirror 
should be made on the first hour on Friday, under a waxing moon; the 
sculptor or workman must be chaste for nine days beforehand, must be 



bathed, and must wear clean clothes; the words in which the master conjures 
the spirit are identified, implausibly, as ‘Chaldean’; the master’s greeting to 
the knight is Parate insilitio gytromon, which approximates an obviously 
meaningful statement even less than the greeting in the first version; and the 
knight who has at first answered questions in writing will answer per 
exercicium at night and orally throughout the day, revealing all things 
beneath the moon. 

The First Mirror of Lilith (spelled Lilit or Lylet ) is dedicated to this 
ancient Hebrew demon and to her followers and her ‘knights’ - although the 
text seems to slip into calling the spirit Bylet before the experiment is over.- 
The master commands these ‘demons’ to appear in non-threatening form 
and answer questions. The mirror itself can be made in the form of a shield, 
but need not be. The master prays to Lilith to come in her own appearance, 
not in that of ravens, conjuring her to sit with him whenever the master 
wants. She will appear in a mirror with two or more servants, and will tell 
the truth or give appropriate signs regarding a theft, murder, or other 
circumstance. 

In one of the remaining experiments (no. 20) the master goes to a secret 
place at a conjunction of Venus and Jupiter, with burning candles and a 
polished steel mirror, made under a particular phase of the moon. He makes 
a circle, and puts the mirror on a piece of wood in the form of a knife. He 
implores God to make the mirror grow and become bright. Then he recites a 
brief conjuration three times, and the mirror will seem to grow and become 
bright. Many people will appear, as in a field. The master may ask them 
anything he wants, and will obtain an answer. After the first time, he may 
work this procedure whenever and wherever he wishes, though he must 
always do so in a secret place; once consecrated for that purpose, the mirror 
can be used repeatedly. In the other experiment (no. 33), the master smears 
olive oil on a mirror, says a doxology, enters a magic circle that is sprinkled 
with verbena, turns to the east, and conjures a spirit. When it comes, he 
conjures it to tell him the truth, without causing any harm. If the spirit 
refuses, the master reads the unbreakable ‘bond of Solomon’, an extended 
conjuration. 

As in some of the illusionist experiments, spirits who appear to divulge 
information are here designated as knights. But three of these experiments 
are more distinctive in being given titles, taken from the chief spirits to 
whom they appeal, Lillith and Floron. The former is familiar from Hebrew 


tradition, while the latter is known from the writings of Cecco d’Ascoli.- 
The conjuration (and presumably also the greeting) in ‘Chaldean’ (actually 
garbled Arabic, as we shall see in Chapter 6) adds a touch of exoticism to 
some of these experiments. But perhaps the most curious feature, found in 
the Mirror of Floron, is the reference to the spirit’s giving written responses, 
through a mechanism that is not clearly specified; perhaps the master is to 
see the spirit holding a written message for his inspection, or possibly 
patterns discerned on the surface of the mirror are to be interpreted as some 
form of writing. 


Experiments involving crystals 

For the use of crystals and related objects in scrying, Johannes Hartlieb is 
again a helpful source of information: 

Some take a clear, fine, polished crystal or beryl and have it consecrated, 
then keep it clean, and lay incense, myrrh, and so forth on it. Then when 
they wish to exercise their art they wait for a clear day, or use a clean 
room with many consecrated candles. The masters go to a bathing room, 
taking an innocent child, and dressing themselves in pure white clothes. 
They sit down and speak magic prayers {zauber batt ), and burn magic 
offerings {zauber opffer), then order the boy to look into the stone and 
whisper secret words into his ear, which are allegedly most holy - but are 
indeed devilish words.- 

The Munich handbook gives two divinatory experiments entailing the 
use of crystals, both of them extremely brief and simple. The implement 
used may be something like the legendary crystal ball; when the Rawlinson 
necromantic manuscript refers to crystals it speaks of them as ‘stones’, 
which surely were polished, whatever their shape. In one experiment (no. 
24) the master first takes a crystal and washes it with wine, then he writes 
certain names of Christ on it with olive oil, and asks for two or three angels 
to appear in that crystal and reveal the truth to a virgin boy. The boy 
conjures these angels to come in the crystal so he may see them. When they 
come, the boy conjures them thrice to sit on golden seats and not withdraw 
from the crystal without the master’s permission. For the other experiment 
(no. 25) the master takes a crystal in the form of a seal or mirror and places 
it in wax. Then he writes the name ‘Honely’ on it with oil. He prays Christ 


to bestow wondrous and useful powers upon this stone, as he has done to 
other stones, to herbs, and to certain words; the text refers to this prayer as a 
conjuration, but the writer does not have quite the temerity to conjure Christ 
himself. He does then conjure certain angels to come at once and appear in 
the crystal, and not withdraw from it until they have answered the questions 
he has to ask. 

It is probably not an accident that in both of these experiments, unlike 
most, the spirits conjured are expressly referred to as angels, and in one of 
them names of Christ are invoked (which is not uncommon in these 
experiments), while in the other the conjuration is preceded by a prayer to 
Christ (which is altogether uncommon). The other reflecting surfaces have a 
kind of artificial reflectivity: some of them need to have oil applied to them, 
and a mirror is a manufactured object. The crystal, however, was thought to 
have natural luminosity as one of the properties bestowed on it in its 
creation. Perhaps for this reason it seemed more natural for a crystal to serve 
as a medium for the conjuring of unfallen spirits, although this explanation 
would have greater force if it were supported by substantial evidence from 
other sources. 

A complex experiment involving apparitions in a thumbnail 

Five divinatory experiments in the Munich handbook - as many as those 
using mirrors - require the medium to gaze into his own polished fingernail 
or thumbnail. These tend to be elaborate rituals, with preliminary measures 
followed by multiple conjurations, then interrogation of the spirits who 
appear, and in some cases procedures for terminating the experiment. Most 
of these rituals are intended specifically to learn about the circumstances of 
a theft, although the text indicates that no. 27 (and presumably others as 
well) can serve to provide information about whether a friend is well or 
sick, whether someone is on the road, or other matters. A fingernail may 
seem an odd instrument for divination, and the image of a boy carrying on a 
conversation with an elaborately described demon moving about on such a 
small screen may seem somewhat comic, but fixing the boy’s attention on 
so narrow a space may in fact have been an aid to concentration: the smaller 
the surface, and the closer it is held to the eye, the more it will be in focus 
and potential distractions will be out of focus. 

No. 27 is broken into two ‘chapters’, the first of which reads as follows: 



To find out about a theft, take a virgin boy of legitimate birth, at 
whatever hour you wish before noon, and scrape well the thumb nail of 
his left hand with a knife. Then bind to the same thumb, beneath the nail, 
a slip with the following names written on it. And these are the names: 
Egippia, Benoham, Beanke vel Beanre, Reranressym, Alredessym, 
Ebemidyrr, Fetolinie [?], Dysi, Medirini, Alhea, Heresim, Egippia, 
Benoham [repeated], Haham, Ezirohias, Bohodi, Hohada, Anna, 
Hohanna, Ohereo, Metaliteps, Aregereo, Agertho, Aliberri, [and] Halba. 

When this is done, if the boy does not see something, etc. [sic\]. But if 
he does see something, bind a strap of sheepskin, which you have had 
with you while hearing three complete masses, on the slip, around the 
thumb, while saying this conjuration: ‘O you demons, who have 
appeared before me in the nail of this boy, by Him who is Alpha and 
Omega, 1 order and command and conjure you, by the most sacred names 
Ely, Eloy, Messias, Sother, Emmanuel, Sabaoth, [and] Adonay, and by 
On, which is the first name of the Lord, Pantoncraton [sic], Anetheten, 
and by the other names known and unknown to me, that you should have 
no power to withdraw with your companions until you have fulfilled my 
will completely, without any falsehood or harm to anyone. And if you 
disdain to do this, 1 command you to be bound beneath the deep waters 
of the sea, by these two names, Joth [and] Nabnoth, by which Solomon 
bound demons in a glass vessel. 1 conjure you by the seven signs of 
Solomon, and by his seal and wisdom, that you should have no licence to 
withdraw from here until you have told and shown me the truth about all 
that 1 ask. ’ 

When you have said this, if the boy does not speak straightaway, 
recite this conjuration in his ear: T conjure you, virginal youth, by the 
true God Basyon, and by the name[s] On, Berion, Sabaoth, [and] 
Adonay, [etc.], to have no power of concealing from me, but to manifest 
all that you see.’ 

When you have recited these conjurations three times, if the spirits do 
not hasten to your service, add this conjuration: ‘You demons from the 
east, you demons from the west, you demons from the south, you 
demons from the north, open up to us, Discobermath, Archidemath, 
Fritath, Altramat, Pestiferat, Helyberp, Hegergibet, Sathan.’ 

