SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — full text of Munich Handbook study
CHUNK: 6/39  |  CHARS: 120320-143767 of 925451
============================================================

ations) 

• violent procedures 
and results 

• secrecy, to evade 
detection and 
punishment 

sees the spirits 

Correlation 

Superbus — 

Luxuriosus - 

Avarus — recovery or 

with 

grandeur of display 

seduction or rape 

discovery of goods being 

fubert us's 

being a matter of 

being one of the 

a main purpose, and this 

spirits 

primary concern 

most common 

purposes 

being a potentially 
lucrative form of 
divination 


See Chapters 5 "» fur elaboration of these point*. 






While recognizing that this reconstruction is and must be conjectural, 1 
suggest, then, that the compiler of this miscellany was a moderately educated 
member of the lower or middling clergy who began by writing colourful and 
imaginative experiments in hopes of establishing a reputation for expertise in the 
occult, and perhaps a foothold at some court, possibly that of the Duke of 
Bavaria in Munich, but whose aspirations were thwarted, and who eventually 
turned his attention to forms of magic that were less fanciful, playful and 
fantastic, but more in demand for practical application and thus more lucrative, 
and in any case still revealing of the diversities of magic in late medieval culture. 

Table B summarizes the characterization already given of the three types of 
necromantic experiment found in Clm 849 and anticipates further discussion (in 
the next three chapters) of these categories. As should be obvious, it consists of 
broad generalizations, which require some qualification and nuance when 
applied to particular concrete experiments. While 1 have decided to use this chart 
in the interest of clarifying the patterns, the distinctions, and the correlations 1 
mean to emphasize, 1 am aware of the hazards of fixing these categories too 
sharply and making them rigid when they should remain fluid. In highlighting 
the affinity of the psychological experiments with those of Arabic astral magic, 
for example, and the divinatory ones with practices well known in Judaism, I by 
no means wish to suggest that the techniques in question were exclusively or 
even specifically Arabic on the one hand, Jewish on the other. The world of 
magic is clearly more complex than that, and the boundaries between Jewish and 
Muslim magic too difficult to define. Still, in some ways the heart of this study - 
at least its attempt to distinguish different elements in the necromancers’ own 
perception of their art - is sketched on this chart in schematic form. I do not 
adhere strictly in subsequent discussion to the organizing principles that might 
be suggested by the table, but everything laid out here is covered at some point 
either above or in following chapters. 


Notes 

1 Bernard Cerquiglini, Eloge de la variante: histoire critique de la philologie (Paris: Seuil, 1989). See 
also Stephen G. Nichols, ‘Introduction: philology in a manuscript culture’, Speculum, 65, no. 1 (Jan. 1990), 
1-10; Siegfried Wenzel, ‘Reflections on (new) philology’, ibid., 11-18; and the other articles in that issue of 
the journal. 

2 Picatrix: The Latin Version of the Ghayat Al-Haki-m, ed. David Pingree (London: Warburg Institute, 
1986). 

3 See, among recent works, Jean Clam, ‘Philosophisches zu Picatrix : Gelehrte Magie und 


Anthropologie bei einem arabischen Hermetiker des Mittelalters’, in Albert Zimmerma nn and Andreas 
Speer, eds, Mensch und Natur im Mittelalter, 1 (Berlin and New York: de Gruyter, 1991), 481-509, and 
Toufic Fahd, ‘Sciences naturelles et magie dans Gay at al-Hakim du Pseudo-Mayriti’, in E. Garcia Sanchez, 
ed., Ciencias de la naturaleza en al-Andalus, 1 (Granada: Conseja Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, 
1990), 11-21. 

4 Hans Dieter Betz, ed., The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation, Including the Demotic Spells, 1 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986). On the cultural significance of miscellanies see Stephen G. 
Nichols and Siegfried Wenzel, eds., The Whole Book. Cultural Perspectives on the Medieval Miscellany 
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996). 

5 Roger Bacon, De Nigromancia, ed. and trans. Michael-Albion Macdonald (Gillette, NJ: Hep tangle, 
1988). 

6 W. Braekman, ‘Magische experimenten en toverpraktijken uit een middelnederlands handschriff, 
Verslagen en mededelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamse Academie voor Taal-en Letterkunde, 1966, pp. 53- 
118; also published separately (Ghent: Seminarie voor Volkskunde, 1966). 

7 Fol. 134r: ‘ et postea dicatur in auriola pueri ista oracio: “O dio fare dispiriti spiritale cum lamina 
hocha te voio pre [deleted?] pregare che spiriti a questo puto vergeno in questa angestara diby mandare 
che diga emonstre lauerita de quelo chio voio domandare ”.’ 

8 Catalogus codicum Latinorum Bibliothecae Regiae Monacensis, 2nd edn, vol. 1, pt 1 (Munich: 
Bibliotheca Regia, 1892), 202 (Liber incantationum, exorcismorum et fascinationum variarum). 

9 Lynn Thorndike, The History of Magic and Experimental Science (New York: Macmillan and 
Columbia University Press, 1923-58). 

10 Lynn Thorndike, ‘Imagination and magic: force of imagination on the human body and of magic on 
the human mind’, in Melanges Eugene Tisserant, 7 (Vatican City: Biblioteca Vaticana, 1964), 353-58. 

11 Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages, esp. 6-8. 

12 I have this information from Frank Klaassen, who is studying manuscripts of ritual magic in English 
collections. 

13 E.M. Butler, Ritual Magic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1949), 62. 

14 See the codicological analysis of the manuscript given in the final chapter. 

15 See n. 7 above. 

16 It is worth noting that Thorndike, ‘Imagination and magic’, evidently did not recognize the handbook 
as an example of anything else he had seen. 

17 Hansen, Quellen, 539 44. On the witch trials in this region and their context see now Pierette Paravy, 
De la chretiente romaine a la Reforme en Dauphine: eveques, fideles et deviants (vers 1340—vers 1530) 
(Rome: Ecole fran 9 aise de Rome, 1993), and for this case in particular pp. 814-16. 

18 Paravy, p. 815 n. 4, suggests that this is a reference to the pilgrimage shrine at Einsiedeln. She also 
cites literature on the theme of the diabolical bridge, in particular B.M. Galanti, ‘Le leggenda del “Ponte del 
Diavolo” in Italia’, Lares, 18 (1952), 61-73. 

19 Johann Hartlieb, Das Buch aller verbotenen Kiinste, des Aberglaubens und der Zauberei, ed. and 
trans. Falk Eisermann and Eckhard Graf (Ahlerstedt: Param, 1989). 

20 Frank Fiirbeth, Johannes Hartlieb: Untersuchungen zu Leben und Werk (Tubingen: Niemeyer, 1992), 
88-132. 

21 Hartlieb, eh. 22, pp. 34f. 

22 Etvmologiae, viii.9, in the Patrologia latina, 82:310-14. 

23 Hugh of St Victor, Didascalicon: De studio legendi, vi.15, ed. Charles Henry Buttimer (Washington, 
DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1939). 


24 Chs 22, 28. 

25 Chs 22-24. 

26 Chs 33-34. 

27 E.g., ch. 85. 

28 Otto Hartig, Die Griindung der Miinchener Hofbibliothek durch Albrecht V und Johann Jakob 
Fugger (Abhandlungen der Koniglichen Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, philosoph.-philolog. 
und hist. Klasse, vol. 28, sect. 3, 1914), gives the history of the library that provided the earliest foundation 
for the Bavarian State Library, but does not give the provenance of this manuscript. 

29 There are two instances in experiment no. 7, and one in no. 27. 

30 See the variation in names in nos 4, 7, 9, 10 and 11. 

31 The relationship between demonic and other forms of magic in the Renaissance is a primary theme 
of D.R Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic, from Ficino to Campanella (London: Warburg Institute, 
1958). See also Charles Zika, ‘Reuchlin’s De verbo mirifico and the magic debate of the late fifteenth 
century’, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, 39 (1976), 104-38, esp. 112-14 (see p. 114, n. 
30, Tota Magia, quae in usu est apud modernos, et quam merito exterminat ecclesia, nullam habet 
firmitatem, nullum fundamentum, nullam veritatem, quia pendet ex manu hostium veritatis, potestatum 
harum tenebrarum, quae tenebras falsitatis, male dispositis intellectibus obfundunt). 

32Fols 8r-llv. 

33 See no. 32 in the edition, where a conjuration edited from two versions in the later folios is addressed 
to a spirit named Mirage, while an alternative form in the main block addresses Satan. 

34 The Schriftproben in Fiirbeth, Johannes Hartlieb, p. 280, show that Hartlieb’s handwriting is not at 
all like that in fols 3-108 of Clm 849; it more closely resembles that of some later folios, but not enough 
that any of this material could be assigned to him. 

35 Thorndike, Michael Scot, esp. 32-39 and 116-21. See also the interesting article of Helmuth 
Grossing and Franz Stuhlhofer, ‘Versuch einer Deutung der Rolle der Astrologie in den personlichen und 
politischen Entscheidungen einiger Habsburger des Spatmittelalters’, Anzeiger der Osterreichischen 
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, 117 (1980), 267-83. On court astrology in 
England see Hilary M. Carey, Courting Disaster: Astrology at the English Court and University in the Later 
Middle Ages (New York: St Martin’s Press, 1992). 


3 


Banquets, Horses and Castles: 
Illusionist Experiments 

T he fifteenth-century writer of the Rawlinson necromantic manuscript tells 
how to summon a demon in the form of a horse by using conjurations, a 
ring with the Tetragrammaton inscribed on it, and a diagram made with the 
blood of a hoopoe or a bat. The magician must stand in a circle that extends to 
the east window of his chamber. When the conjuration is complete, a multitude 
of spirits will appear in the sky, with many horses; the magician must choose the 
horse with the red bridle, which will descend outside his chamber. He may then 
ride off, with sceptre and sword in hand. But he must beware of committing any 
sins while engaged in this experiment, because if he is unclean he can no longer 
command the demon. The writer then tells a cautionary tale - from his own 
experience, he says - to impress upon the reader the importance of not sinning in 
the course of this adventure: 

For I myself once travelled from Alexandria to India in the space of an hour, 
and there I saw women whom I found very pleasing indeed, and at once I had 
my will with one of them. But there was no chance of finding a confessor 
unless I waited quite some time. I returned to my horse, which was standing 
where it had been conjured [to stand], but when I seized the end of the bridle 
the horse began to bolt, not allowing me to put my foot in the stirrup because 
of my uncleanness. I held on to the bridle firmly, and the horse hurled me 
forty feet into the air. Finally, seeing that I was going to perish miserably, I let 
go and fell, breaking my leg quite badly. So I lay there in India for four 
months, and until I had recuperated I could not go and see my horse. 

But when I had recovered I went to confession and did penance. Then I 
prepared a chamber for myself, and had a sceptre, sword and ring newly 
made, since the ring which I had defiled had lost its power. When these 
instruments had been fashioned and newly consecrated, I summoned those 
same spirits as before, and had them bring the same spirit or horse. With 



conjurations I commanded that horse and mounted him peacefully, and 1 kept 
on riding him continually for an entire month, except when 1 dismounted to 
sleep and eat or drink, and thus 1 circled the globe eight times. And 1 had him 
carry me through the sky until 1 was practically suffocated because of the 
pressure of the air. In circling the globe 1 discovered many and wondrous 
treasures, whose virtues 1 learned later on under the instruction of one of the 
spirits, whom I then locked up. And thus [by this long riding] 1 caused my 
horse much grief. 

When 1 finally dismounted from him and asked him why he had harmed 
me, he replied that from that point on he was unable to do so, but he said he 
would rather have been in hell than keep riding for so long a time. So he 
asked me not to cause him such grief any more, and he would minister to me 
faithfully when 1 summoned him, so long as I was clean. And thus 1 repaid 
him evil for evil. 

The ceremony given here for conjuring the horse is borrowed, perhaps 
directly, from the De nigromancia or Thesaurus spirituum ascribed to Roger 
Bacon.- In the cautionary tale the reader will recognize a variation on a story 
known from The Thousand and One Nights, from the French romances 
(especially Li Roumans de Cleomades of Adenes li Rois), and from Chaucer’s 
abbreviated and mock-naturalistic retelling in The Squire’s Tale . 1 In the Arabic 
and French versions, a magical flying horse cannot be made to descend where 
the rider wishes to land, and the change of plan that results becomes a factor in 
development of the plot. In the Rawlinson manuscript as in the literary versions 
of the tale, the Orient is portrayed as exotic and romantically alluring, although 
the seduction scene has become a peremptory telling of a male fantasy, with little 
trace of the ecriture feminine that has been seen in the literary narratives.- What 
concerns the narrator here is less the seduction than its consequences. Very much 
like Lancelot in the Quest of the Holy Grail, the magician is unable to continue 
his mission until repentance and confession wipe away his disability. - 

The moral implications of this story need not detain us now, although the 
moral ambiguity recurs in this manuscript, in a lengthy Confiteor which admits 
to every manner of sin but terminates in a prayer for power over certain spirits.- 
As for the world of flying horses, it seems not unlike that of Jubertus of 
Regensburg, who flew to diabolical assemblies with wondrous speed not on the 
back of a horse but on the excrement of a mule or horse, ministerio dyabolorum .- 
For present purposes what is most relevant is that the form of magic related in 


this story is intended chiefly for the sake of the magician’s own entertainment, 
and the story about its use is, despite the tone of moral seriousness, a means of 
entertainment presumably both for writer and reader. The compiler of the 
Munich handbook, too, is most inclined toward the anecdotal when he is telling 
his reader how to conjure illusions in which demons appear as horses, castles 
appear out of nowhere, banquets are brought forth with many apparent but 
illusory courses, and the magician dons a cloak of invisibility so as no longer to 
appear at all. 

Depictions of magic in medieval literature often tease the reader with 
uncertainties about the boundary between illusion and reality.- When the water 
level off the coast of Brittany is raised so as to cover the rocks, in Chaucer’s 
Franklin’s Tale, is the transformation real or merely an illusion? 2 When 
wondrous pageants and spectacles are brought forth by inexplicable means at 
court, are they genuine or delusory, and are they worked ‘by craft or 
necromancy’? The literature of magic is replete with stories of magicians who 
produce magical banquets, horses or boats that can transport people over land 
and sea, castles with armed warriors, all of which have a tendency to vanish 
abruptly, suggesting that they rest on dubious ontological foundations. From 
antiquity and through the Middle Ages, critics of magic insisted it was all 
illusion, by which they could mean many things: that it was a means by which 
demons deluded and ensnared the gullible, that its accomplishments were unreal 
and not lasting, that healings as well as spectacles worked by magic were 
unreliable.- The pagan Celsus, taunting his Christian contemporaries in late 
antiquity, compared the miracles of Jesus with ‘the works of sorcerers who 
profess to do wonderful miracles, and the accomplishments of those who are 
taught by the Egyptians, who for a few obols make known their sacred lore in 
the middle of the market-place and drive daemons out of men and blow away 
diseases and invoke the souls of heroes, displaying expensive banquets and 
dining-tables and cakes and dishes which are non-existent, and who make things 
move as though they were alive although they are not really so, but only appear 
as such in the imagination’.- But it was not only the critics who saw at least 
some types of magic as entailing illusion: the magicians themselves seemed to 
revel in their role as illusionists. Not surprisingly, then, many of the formulas in 
our necromantic handbook - and several of the most interesting - involve some 
form of illusion. 


Illusionist experiments in the Munich handbook 


Twelve of the experiments in Clm 849 are ‘illusionist’ ones, intended to make 
things appear other than as they are: to make people perceive some object or 
scene that is not in fact present, to obtain a means of transport such as a horse or 
a boat, to make the dead seem alive or vice versa, or to become invisible. This 
category might be seen as a subset of the ‘psychological’ experiments, but the 
emphasis here is less on deception of the senses than on production of an 
objective display that seems different from what it is. 

The distinguishing features of these experiments are chiefly four. First, either 
they are highly complex, with complicated magic circles, intricately worked-out 
rituals, and at least two conjurations, or else (less often) they are very simple, 
with no circles, relatively simple rituals, and single conjurations. Second, they 
often emphasize the need for secrecy, yet the basic point of the experiment is the 
fascinating and awe-inspiring display of magical powers. Third, these 
experiments are often accompanied by stories (such as the one from the 
Rawlinson manuscript) or by testimonials assuring the reader of their efficacy. 
Fourth, these illusionist experiments, for all their exuberant fantasy, come closer 
than any others in the handbook to touching on themes that would become 
central to the late medieval and early modern conception of witchcraft. 

Seven complex experiments (nos 6-11 and 15) involve relatively elaborate 
magic circles and intricate rituals, with two distinct conjurations (first the master 
summons the spirits, who appear to him, then he commands them to execute 
some illusion, and they do so). Among further complications are offerings made 
to induce the spirits to carry out the commands, oaths required of the spirits, and 
provisions for repeating on some future occasion, with less effort, an experiment 
already produced once. The simpler experiments (nos 14, 17, 21, 43 and 45), by 
way of contrast, require no magic circles at all, and have illusionist effect 
following directly from a single conjuration, without an intervening apparition of 
spirits. The difference may be the result of nothing more than the handbook’s 
general tendency toward simpler, less colourful and imaginative formulations in 
its later sections, a tendency seen even in this most fanciful category of magic. 

At certain points in the illusionist experiments of the Munich handbook the 
writer comments explicitly on the need for secrecy. At the end of one experiment 
(no. 8) the writer comments that this book, containing generally unknown names 
and figures of spirits ‘according to their characteristics’ (proprietates ), should be 
kept in a hidden place because its contents have ineffable efficacy. Experiment 
no. 10, which can make the living appear dead and the dead alive, must be kept 
secret because of its great power. In this and in no. 11 the master goes to a 



remote and secret place outside town to carry out his experiment. Experiment no. 
15 must be carried out in a high and secret place. This concern with the esoteric 
nature of necromancy is not exclusively found in the illusionist experiments - 
no. 5 also emphasizes the importance of performing the ritual in a secret place, 
and the text insists that this experiment must be kept secret because it has 
‘ineffable virtue’ - but it is a theme found perhaps most often in this category, 
and the breathless tone thus imparted adds to the entertainment value of these 
illusionist experiments.- Elsewhere, rather than emphasizing the need for 
secrecy, the writer comments on the rarity of knowledge about certain formulas. 
He declares that the art of conjuring an illusory banquet in no. 6 is practically 
unknown in his day, and that ‘Matthew the Spaniard’ was utterly ignorant of this 
magic; he notes that the art of obtaining a cloak of invisibility, in no. 11, is also 
virtually unknown in his day. But the themes of secrecy and obscurity are not 
unrelated: they are both ways of emphasizing the esoteric nature of these 
experiments, and stressing that the reader is being initiated into arcane lore that 
should arouse not only curiosity but also excitement and a sense of privilege. Yet 
it is in the nature of these experiments that in one way or other most of them are 
shared : in some cases the result of the magical is a spectacle that may be put on 
for the wonderment of others, and even when the point is for the magician to 
become invisible, his very state of non-visibility is a way of relating to others. 

The testimonials asserting the efficacy of the experiments take various forms. 
The writer declares that he has seen one experiment (no. 8) worked in various 
ways, but the way he gives is the best, entailing least effort and no danger. In 
recounting the effects of another experiment (no. 10) he claims that he has 
personally experienced them all, and that he leaves unmentioned those effects he 
has not experienced. Nor is he shy about claiming the testimony of authorities: 
Socrates himself, he claims, speaks of the power of one circle (no. 9) in his book 
of magic. More simply, he asserts that experiment ( experiencia ) no. 10 is ‘most 
worthy’. At one point (no. 6) the writer addresses a courtly reader, whether real 
or imagined, claiming to remind him of occasions when the magic has worked: 
‘You have often seen me exercise this art in your court, namely that of bringing 
forth stewards’. In a similar vein he tells how he once carried out experiment no. 
7 while the emperor and his nobles were out hunting in a dark wood, causing an 
illusory castle to appear, with demons in the form of knights who attacked the 
emperor and his men. 

What are we to make of all this? Are we to assume that the illusionist 
experiments in this manuscript - and the tales that the writer spins, testifying to 


the efficacy of his own illusions - were intended merely as entertainment? Is it 
unthinkable that the clerical necromancers actually hoped to visit exotic lands on 
flying horses, to explore phantom castles, to feast at magical banquets? The 
question is difficult to answer in any simple way, because what one writer will 
write tongue in cheek another may intend as fact, and because in many ways the 
border between imaginative fantasy and perceived fact is readily permeable: 
fantasies about harm that other people might inflict shade into paranoid fears of 
harm that they are inflicting; erotic fantasies, encouraged by techniques of erotic 
magic, can serve as prelude to actual seduction; purely recreational play with a 
Ouija board or tarot deck gives occasion for traumatic expression of deep-seated 
fantasies and anxieties; words spoken as playful boasts may be heard as 
confirmation of sinister powers. 

