SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 19/39  |  CHARS: 427417-452417 of 911762
============================================================

d kindling of vices, seducer of humans, and master’, ‘most wicked
dragon’, ‘accursed and most mendacious spirit’ and ‘author of diabolical power,
inventor of evils’. The conjuration begins anomalously with a statement
regarding the powers being brought to bear against the Devil (‘may the angels
and archangels accuse you … may the elect of God accuse you’), followed by a
prayer for divine aid (‘God … I invoke your holy name … I humbly implore that
you may deign to give me aid against this spirit Satan’). These elements are
followed by simply commands addressed to the spirit himself (‘Hear, therefore,
Devil … come forth … I adjure you … to be subject to my commands and carry
them out’). The instructions are for the most part purely generic: ‘I adjure you …
to do quickly whatever I command you’, or ‘to do quickly whatever I order and
command of you’, or ‘I adjure and constrain and command you … to obey me
without any impediment or harm or wound or affliction to my body or soul’. At
the end, however, the instruction is specific but allows for such variation that the


--- PAGE 172 ---
effect is still to make this a generic conjuration, for virtually any purpose:
[Come] to me in this hour, without any harm or injury or affliction to my soul
or my body, or send another [spirit] or have him come, who will know
perfectly how to fulfil my every desire, and will not withdraw from me until I
have given him leave and he has fully satisfied my will. I conjure you by all
that is written above to make a spirit come to me carrying gold and silver
[coins] and [hidden] treasures, before I withdraw from this place. And as
often as I invoke him, let him appear at once, benign and humble, harming no
one, and ministering to me in all things, and fulfilling my will. So be it, so be
it, amen. And bring or send me a spirit willing and competent in all
knowledge. May he have the power to make me invisible whenever I wish.
And let him please me, and be always under my power. And provide him also
with the power to consecrate books and experiments, and everything that I
wish. Amen, amen, amen.
Repeatedly the will of the conjuror is identified with that of God: the spirit is
told that God himself commands him, or that the conjuror does so not by his own
power but by that of God, or ‘by the power which I have over you, Mirage,
given me by God almighty in baptism and the other sacraments’. At one point
the conjuration reads, ‘The Word made flesh commands you, He who was born
of the virgin commands you, Jesus of Nazareth commands you, He who created
you commands you to carry out quickly what I ask or wish to have from you or
desire to know; the more you delay in doing what I command you, the greater
will be your punishment from day to day.’ The reminder of the punishment
awaiting the spirit on the Day of Judgement, and the threat of heightened
torment as a penalty for disobedience, is also repeated – somewhat as elsewhere
(no. 2) a spirit is threatened with being cast forever into the depths of the sea.53
The conjuration of Mirage, from the supplementary material in the codex, is
followed by material that the main block does not take over: a set of instructions
for constructing a circle in a secret location, with various prayers, and
supplementary conjurations in which Mirage is threatened with intensified pains
if he does not present himself: ‘If not, I exorcize you that the chains of your
punishment may be rife with sulpur and pitch.’54 The spirit is to be conjured a
second and third time, if necessary, but no more.55
Exorcisms and conjurations


--- PAGE 173 ---
Adolf Franz published a lengthy formula of exorcism taken from a West
Frankish manuscript of the ninth century, which reads in part:
… I conjure you, Devil, Satan, Enemy,
•   by God the Father almighty;
•   and by those virtues which the Lord himself made and makes;
•   by those angels he has before himself in [his] mind; …
•   by those four animals which uphold the world itself;
•   by every good creation that God has made in heaven and on earth;
•   and by the light and the earth and all its creeping things;
by all these things I conjure you that you should not have power to remain,
for he commands you who ordered you to be cast down from the kingdom of
heaven on high. Hear, therefore, and be afraid [Audi ergo et time ergo], Devil,
Satan, Enemy; you are banned, and again I speak to you and conjure you
•   by that king who rules and commands all things …
Again I have said to you, O infernal enemies, by all things that I have had in
mind for you [in] so great a conjuration as this, that you should not have
power to remain or to do harm or to rebel…. I exorcize you, O accursed one,
most unclean spirit, basilisk dragon, noxious serpent … that you should go
out from this temple of God … I exorcize you, O unclean spirit, author of
sins, deceiver of souls, envious one, insatiable homicide who endeavoured to
kill the immortal man whom God created by his power…. In the name of Our
Lord Jesus Christ I adjure you, O enemy … I conjure you and entreat
[obtestor] you, O enemy, [that] you should not have power to remain here in
this person’s soul or body … I adjure you
•   by the gates of Paradise;
•   by the six golden candlesticks [Apoc 1:12]…
I speak to you in truth, O unclean spirit, dragon, I adjure you,
•   by the Holy Spirit;
•   I adjure you by the six fiery furnaces;
•   I adjure you by the cherubim and seraphim;
•   I adjure you by the wings of the winds;
•   I adjure you by the mystery of Christ’s [passion];
•   I adjure you by the resurrection of Christ the Lord;
•   I adjure you by the precious pearls;
•   I adjure you by the years [and] by the days;
•   I adjure you by the passion of the saints;
•   I adjure you by him who who freed the people Israel from the Red Sea, who freed Daniel from
the lion’s den, who illumined the blind, healed the paralytics, [and] cleansed the lepers.
I adjure you now by him, O enemy, unclean one, inveterate dragon, [that] you
should depart from the soul and withdraw from the body or from all the
inward parts of [this] servant of God….


--- PAGE 174 ---
It is not I who command you, nor my sins, O most unclean spirit, but the
immaculate lamb, Jesus Christ Our Lord, the Son of God, commands you.
The angels press upon [urguent] you, the archangels press upon you, the
prophets press upon you, the apostles press upon you, the martyrs press upon
you, the confessors press upon you. Therefore may the arts of the Devil fail
[defici[a]nt ergo artes diaboli] by day [and] by night …
I exorcize you, O author of diabolical power, inventor of malice …56
The essential elements of this formula are exactly those seen in necromantic
conjurations of a much later era. There are, to be sure, distinctive
embellishments. First, the devil being expelled is not only named (Devil, Satan,
Enemy) but characterized: he is the ‘accursed one, most unclean spirit, basilisk
dragon, noxious serpent’, or the ‘unclean spirit, author of sins, deceiver of souls,
envious one, insatiable homicide who endeavoured to kill the immortal man
whom God created by his power’, and as the ‘author of diabolical power, the
inventor of malice’, and so forth. Second, he is expelled from the energumen’s
body as well as his soul. Third, it is expressly said not merely that the exorcist
commands in the name of Christ (as in Acts 16:18) but that Christ himself is the
one who commands, even if through the exorcist. Fourth, various sacred figures
are represented as participating in the exorcist’s struggle with the malign spirit:
the angels, archangels, prophets, apostles, martyrs and confessors all place
pressure upon the possessing devil (urguent, for urgent), or denounce him
(reading arguunt). And fifth, the second-person address is interrupted with a
third-person subjunctive urging that the Devil’s arts or snares may come to
naught. The essential structure of the formula remains unaffected by these
elements, but the network of relations is rendered more complex. The exorcist
insults the spirit with whom he is engaged in struggle, identifies his own action
as that of Christ, and calls upon the angels and saints not simply as possessors of
power that can be tapped through invocation but as active participants in the
contest. The representation of the exorcism as a cosmic combat, perhaps a local
instance of that apocalyptic conflict that Christ initiated in his own exorcisms
and carried forward in his passion and resurrection, here becomes exceptionally
dramatic and explicit.
As already indicated, the conjurations of the necromancer are identical in
form to the exorcisms designed to dispel demons. The resemblance may be seen
in a manual for exorcizing the possessed that was printed several times in the
late fifteenth century went by the title The Conjuration of Malign Spirits


--- PAGE 175 ---
Dwelling in the Bodies of People, as it is Done in Saint Peter.57 The simplest
form of exorcism used here is simply, ‘I exorcize you, unclean spirit, in the name
of God the Father almighty  and in the name of Jesus Christ his Son  and by
the power of the Holy Spirit  that you should recede from this servant of God,
N.’ Like the conjurations of exorcists, however, the formulas used here become
extended through repetition of the instruction and through numerous
invocations:
I conjure you, O Devil, by the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and by
the patriarchs and prophets, apostles, evangelists, martyrs, confessors, virgins,
and all the holy men and holy women of God … and by our Lord Jesus Christ
I conjure you, that you should recede from this servant of God, N. I conjure
you, O Devil, by the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, which he endured for
the human race, that you should recede from this servant of God, N. I conjure
you, O Devil, by the holy cross on which our Lord [died for] the servant of
God, N., that you should not be able to conceal yourself in his body, nor in his
members, nor in his head. I conjure you, Devil, by the nails of our Lord Jesus
Christ, by which his hands and feet were affixed to the cross, that you should
withdraw from this servant of God, N., that you not be able to conceal
yourself in his mouth or head. I conjure you, Devil, by the lance that
Longinus held, by which he pierced the side of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
blood and water flowed out, that you not be able to conceal yourself in his
throat or on his tongue or under his tongue, or in his other members. I conjure
you, Devil, by the death and burial of Christ, from which he rose from the
dead on the third day, that you not be able to conceal yourself in his bowels or
inward parts. I conjure you, Devil, by the resurrection of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in which he appeared to his disciples, saying, ‘It is I, do not be afraid,’
and he commanded them, saying, ‘Go into all the world and preach the gospel
to every creatures; he who believes and is baptized will be saved, but he who
does not believe will be condemned’; by the aforesaid words I conjure and
admonish you that you should recede from this servant of God, N. I conjure
you, O Devil, by the ascension of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you should
recede from this servant of God, N. I conjure you, Devil, by the Holy Spirit,
the Paraclete most high, whom our Lord Jesus entrusted to his disciples in
fiery tongues, that you should recede from this servant of God, N., and not
return any more, nor make any [spirit] return to him, and as God separated
heaven from earth, truth from falsehood, good from evil, sweet from bitter, so


--- PAGE 176 ---
may you be separated from this servant of God and not be able to approach
him any more …
The exorcist claims directly the authority of Christ, proclaiming that Christ
himself commands the spirit to withdraw:
He commands you, accursed devil, who walked on the sea with dry feet….
He commands you, accursed devil, who commanded the winds and the sea
and the storms. He commands you, accursed devil, who ordered that you be
cast from the heights of heaven to the depths of Earth….
He further threatens the spirit by reminding him of the punishments prepared for
him: ‘Nor should you be unaware, Satan and Belzebuch, that pains and torments
will come upon you in the day of judgement and in that eternal day when God
will come like a fiery furnace to judge the living and the dead….’ Not only the
general structure of the formulas but even the precise wording echoes the
conjurations of the Munich handbook and other necromantic texts. At one point,
for example, the manual for dispelling a demon parallels the conjuration of
Mirage:
You, therefore, most evil spirit, enemy of humankind, death’s plunderer
[raptor], evader of justice [iustitie declinator], root of evils, font of vices,
seducer of humans [deductor hominum] … master of demons …
You, therefore, most evil Mirage, enemy of the faith of humankind, inventor
[repertor] of death, herald of injustice [iniusticie declarator], root of evils,
inciter of vices, seducer of humans [seductor hominis], master of demons …58
Unlike the rite in this oft-published work, the exorcism of elves and other
‘demons’ from a fifteenth-century medico-magical manuscript makes no
pretence of official status, yet it is identical in its basic form to other exorcisms
and conjurations:
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, amen. I
conjure you, elves and all kinds of demons, of the night or of the day, by the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Spirit, and the undivided Trinity, and by the
intercession of the most blessed and glorious ever virgin Mary, by the prayers
of the prophets, by the merits of the patriarchs, by the intercessions


--- PAGE 177 ---
[suffragia] of the angels and archangels, by the intervention of the apostles,
by the passion of the martyrs, by the faith of the confessors, by the chastity of
the virgins, and by the intercession of all the saints, and by the Seven
Sleepers, whose names are Malchus, Maximian, Dionysius, John,
Constantine, Serapion, [and] Mortian [MS Martimanus], and by the name of
the Lord God which is blessed forever A G L A , that you should cause
or inflict no harm or any evil on this servant of God, N., whether in sleep or
while awake.  Christ has conquered [sic]  Christ reigns  Christ rules 
may Christ bless us  [and] defend us from every evil.  Amen.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, amen. 
In my name they will cast out demons, they will speak with new tongues,
they will take up serpents, and if they drink any poison it will not harm them,
[and] they will put their hands on the sick and will cure them.  Wondrous
cross, dispeller of sorrow, recovery of health.  Behold the cross of the Lord;
flee, adverse ones [ partes adverse].  The lion of the tribe of Judah has
conquered, the root of David has sprouted [allam?]. 
 Christ conquers 
Christ reigns  Christ rules  may Christ defend this servant of God from
every fantasy and every vexation of the Devil, and from every evil, at every
hour and everywhere, by the power of the holy cross 
 Amen 
 agios 
hyskyros  athanathos  eleyson .59
The same may be said of an exorcism of ‘malignant spirits’ found in the same
manuscript:
Hear, O accursed Satan, I adjure you by the name of the eternal God and of
Our saviour, His Son Jesus Christ. Depart, trembling and sighing, overcome
with your envy. Let there be nothing in common between you and your angels
and the servant of God, N. Do not harm him or appear visibly before him, in
his sleep or while he is awake. Again I conjure you demons or malignant
spirits, whoever you are, by the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ on the
cross, and by his bloody wounds. Again I conjure you by the death of Jesus
Christ on the cross and the giving up of his spirit, which descended into hell
and despoiled it, that now and henceforth you should always flee from this
servant of God, N., and never enter into him, but go out and withdraw from
him. Again I conjure you by the power of the words written here, if thou are
or ye are within him, that thou shouldst or ye should (if you are many) go out
from him, so that he may have no terror or disturbance from henceforth. This


--- PAGE 178 ---
compels you: may the Word made flesh  the holy cross of Christ, the nails,
[and] the crown of thorns drenched in the blood of the Lamb of God on the
cross save him, defend the bearer here and everywhere from every adversity
and perversity of the Devil. In the name of the Father, etc.60
In exorcisms the boundary between mainstream tradition and deviant usage is
difficult to define with precision, but the extreme cases are easy enough to
determine. One late medieval manuscript requires that the energumen be laid
before an altar after mass, inside a chalk diagram, with three stoles binding his
body; another requires that the possessed person be dressed in a chasuble and
stole and made to lie on his back, with feet turned toward the altar, while the
exorcist recites a ritual bond (vinculum) to control the evil spirits by the power of
various divine names.61 When Niccolò Consigli was tried at Florence in 1384,
for example, he was accused not only of summoning demons to work harm but
also of exorcizing the possessed and thus usurping clerical prerogatives. When a
ten-year-old girl was brought to him he cured her of possession by laying her on
a rug, and intoning a diabolical incantation that began ‘Tant muructa? tiri?’62 In
comparison, the exorcisms cited above share their basic form (from declaration
through instruction) with the necromantic conjurations we have examined, and
they all rest on the mainstream theological assumption that the will of the
demons can be constrained, with God’s permission and aid, and through the
power of the sacred. The necromancers shared with fully official exorcists a
belief in the power of the holy to command and ultimately constrain the unclean
spirits.
Following a suggestion of Lynn White, André Goddu has sought to explain
what he sees as the ‘failure of exorcism’ in the fifteenth century largely in terms
of a heightened consciousness of the possibility that exorcism may be
ineffective. Faced with these diminished expectations, theologians began to
argue that exorcism was indeed effective on the spiritual plane even if residual
bodily effects remained. Alternatively, one could fall back on the time-honoured
notion that if exorcism did not succeed then prima facie the condition was not
truly one of demonic possession.63 Interesting as his argument is, it rests upon
the questionable assumption that the use of exorcism in fact declined. What
Goddu shows is that in the October volumes of the Acta sanctorum there is
diminished occurrence of exorcism in materials from the fifteenth century. But
he seems to be referring mainly not to actual exorcisms performed by saints
while they were alive, but rather expulsion of demons worked at the tombs of


--- PAGE 179 ---
deceased saints, which have indirect relevance at most to the study of exorcism.
More compelling is the suggestion of Nancy Caciola, that precisely in the
fifteenth century there was increasing interest in exorcism as a quasi-liturgical
ritual, and that extensive manuals on exorcism, with formulas and instructions
for its use, are chiefly the produce of this century. To be sure, there were lengthy
formulas in earlier eras, mainly derived from baptismal exorcisms, but before the
fifteenth century exorcisms tended to be more concise, and the techniques in
large measure improvised.64 The Munich handbook was thus riding on the crest
of a new development: what it represents is a particular version (or, from an
orthodox perspective, perversion) of a more general interest in the elaboration
and assembly of materials for the commanding of malign spirits. Once again we
can see conjuration as the reverse side of a tapestry whose obverse consists of
orthodox exorcism – both taking on new significance, as it happens, at the same
time that literal tapestries were becoming more significant and more elaborate in
European artistic practice.
Notes
1 A.G. Little, ed., Liber exemplorum ad usum praedicantium, saeculo XIII compositus a quodam Fratre
Minore Anglico de provincia Hiberniae, secundum codicem Dunelmensem editus (Aberdeen: Typis
Academicis, 1908), 22. Barbara Newman, who is working on the theme of demon-preachers in and around
the thirteenth century, called this text to my attention.
2 See Richard P.H. Greenfield, Traditions of Belief in Late Byzantine Demonology (Amsterdam:
Hakkert, 1988): 277, on texts in which it appears that God is being commanded or conjured.
3 Lester K. Little, Benedictine Maledictions: Liturgical Cursing in Romanesque France (Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1993).
4 See the curse directed against thieves in the Rawlinson necromantic manuscript, fols 121r–121v:
Obscurentur oculi eorum ne videant et dorsum eorum semper incurua. Irruat super eos formido et pauor in
magnitudine brachij tui. Fiant inmobiles quasi lapis, donec pertranseat populus tuus, domine, donec
pertranceat [sic] populus tuus [sic] iste quem possedisti, etc …. (Cf. 124r–124v.)
5 In the Vulgate, Song of Songs 2:7, Adiuro vos, filiae Hierusalem, per capreas cervosque camporum,
ne suscitetis neque evigilare faciatis dilectam.
6 C. Stephen Jaeger, The Origins of Courtliness: Civilizing Trends and the Formation of Courtly Ideals,
939–1210 (Philadelphia, 1985), 238, citing Nicetius, Epistulae Austrasicae, in MGH Epp. Merow. et Karol.
aev., 1/3/9, 119–22.
7 Charles Plummer, ed., Vitae sanctorum Hiberniae, 1 (Oxford: Clarendon, 1910), 143: illa bestia
fugata ad persequentem se uoce humana dixit: ‘Adiuro te in nomine Brigide, uirginis Hibernensis, ut me
dimittas.’
8 M.R. James, ‘Twelve medieval ghost-stories’, English Historical Review, 37 (1922), 413–22 (no. 3).
On these cases see Jean-Claude Schmitt, Les revenants: les vivants et les morts dans la société médiévale
(Paris: Gallimard, 1994), 168–73.
9 Michael D. Swartz, ‘Scribal magic and its rhetoric: formal patterns in medieval Hebrew and Aramaic


--- PAGE 180 ---
incantation texts from the Cairo Genizah’, Harvard Theological Review, 83 (1990), 163–80.
10 Rawl. 19r–20r, 124v, 139r–142r, 151v, 155r–156r; 148r–149r; 153r.
11 Martin Buber, I and Thou, 2nd edn, trans. Ronald Gregor Smith (New York: Scribner, 1958), 83.
12 See Richard Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989),
78–80.
13 See Iohannes de Francofordia, Quaestio, utrum potestas cohercendi demonis fieri possit per
caracteres, figuras atque verborum prolationes (1412), in Joseph Hansen, ed., Quellen und Untersuchungen
zur Geschichte des Hexenwahns und der Hexenverfolgung im Mittelalter (Bonn: Georgi, 190l; repr.
Hildesheim: Olms, 1963), 71–82. See also the conclusions of the Paris theologians, from 1398, in Jean
Gerson, Œuvres complètes, ed. Palemon Glorieux (Paris: Descle, 1961–73), vol. 10, p. 89: article 17
condemns the belief ‘That by such arts demons are truly coerced and compelled and do not feign such
compulsion to seduce people’.
14 Precipio vobis occurs six times (e.g., no. 38 and no. 39); adiuro vos/te twice; exorzizo te, voco vos,
invoco vos, and absoluo vos also occur.
15 Te invoco et adiuro (no. 14); coniuro vos et precipio vobis (no. 39).
16 No. 27 (five times in a single conjuration), no. 39 (eleven times).
17 No. 12 (coniuro … coniuro te … coniuro vos et exorcizo vos [et] impero vobis); no. 39 (coniuro vos
… coniuro et contestor vos … adiuro vos followed by eight more occurrences of coniuro vos); no. 8 (vos
coniuro et exorcizo, et prouoco vos … coniuro vos … coniuro vos et impero atque precipio vobis … vos
advoco); no. 15 (vos potenter invoco … vos invoco et coniuro potenter et exorziso … vos invoco et coniuro
et exorcizo et constringo); no. 33 (vos exorcisamus atque imperamus … exorcizamus atque viriliter
imperamus); no. 11 (invoco vos ex parte Patris, prouoco vos ex parte Filij, invoco vos ex parte Spiritus
Sancti). Further examples: coniuro vos et advoco, followed by coniuro vos twice; coniuro vos six times,
followed by precipio vobis; vos exorciso et coniuro … coniuro vos; vos coniuro et exorcizo et invoco …
coniuro vos … coniuro vos et exorcizo; vos coniuro … coniuro vos … precipio vobis; vobis precipio …
precipio vobis; coniuro vos … precipio vobis; vobis impero et precipio et coniuro … coniuro vos.
18 No. 1 (supplico vobis and te deprecor); no. 4 (vos deprecor, vobis supplico, vos rogito); no. 22 (te
deprecor); no. 23 (te exoramus); no. 24 (rogo … rogo vos); no. 29 (te deprecor); no. 41 (precor te … vocor
et contestor and precor, rogo, et peto).
19 E.g., no. 6 (rogo vos, coniuro et adiuro). no. 15 uses the forms coniuro et constringo te; te invoco,
coniuro, et constringo, and te invoco et coniuro et constringo.
20 Both from no. 10; the latter reads Coniuro vos, omnes demones scriptos in hoc anulo.
21 No. 39 and no. 40.
22 No. 23.
23 In no. 27 he is addressed several time