SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 8/39  |  CHARS: 164016-188438 of 911762
============================================================

ugh of an illusion to last through
the duration of the experiment, and once they began troubling to transport food
from abroad they would be extending themselves beyond the contracted
arrangement.
However one wishes to resolve these subtleties, the Munich handbook in any
event gives four experiments for obtaining a spirit in the form of a horse on
which to ride. Let us begin with the most extended of these (no. 9):
I also wish to explain to you how to obtain a horse – that is, a spirit in the


--- PAGE 73 ---
form of a horse – who can bear you across water and land, through hills and
across plains, wherever you wish.
First, on the sixth [day] of the moon, a Tuesday, having fasted, you should
go out with a bridle that has never been used, and in a secret place, and make
a circle with a nail or an iron stylus, as appears here, inscribing in it the
names and figures that appear. When this is done, remain in the middle and
kneel on the bridle facing east, and in a somewhat loud voice say, ‘O
Lautrayth, Feremin, [and] Oliroomim, spirits who attend upon sinners, I, so-
and-so, trusting in your power, conjure you by Him who spoke and [all
things] were made, and who knows all things even before they come to pass,
and by heaven and earth, fire and air and water, Sun and Moon and stars … to
send me three [spirits], who should come to me gently, without causing me
fear, but in such a way that I may remain safe, and you should fulfil entirely
whatever I command you, and bring it effectively to pass. Likewise, I conjure
you aforesaid spirits by Him who is to come to judge the living and the dead
and the world by fire, and by the fearful Day of Judgement, and by the
sentence that you must hear on that day, and [by] this circle with which you
are effectively invoked, that you should be compelled to come here without
delay and humbly fulfil my commands.’
When you have said this three times, you will see three knights come from
afar. On seeing them, before they arrive in your presence, say, ‘I have lifted to
you my eyes unto the mountains, from which my help shall come. My help is
from the Lord, who made heaven and earth’ [Ps. 120:1f. Vulg.; cf. Ps. 122:1].
And when they come to the circle they will at once dismount from their
horses and greet you cheerfully. You will say to them, ‘May the Lord in his
mercy bring you back to your pristine status.’ Then the spirits will say, ‘O
master, we have come to you, all of us prepared to obey your commands. So
command us to do that for which you have made us come here, and it will be
fully brought about.’ You should reply, ‘I wish for you to consecrate this
bridle’ – which you should hold with both hands – ‘so that whenever I shake
it a horse will come before me, in whose mouth I may place it, and I may be
able to mount it and ride safely on it, and proceed wherever I desire.’ Then
they will say they wish to take the bridle with them and return it on the third
day. You will give it to them. And when you have done so, they will mount
their horses and withdraw without delay. When they have gone, leave the
circle, without erasing it, and withdraw from that place.
Return there on the evening of the third day and you will find the same


--- PAGE 74 ---
spirits offering the bridle to you, assuring you that your request has been
carried out. When you have taken the bridle, say, ‘I conjure you by the God of
gods that you will be unable to depart from here without my leave.’ Then they
will reply that they will remain there as long as you wish. Then shake the
bridle, and at once a black horse will come. Place the bridle on him, and ride.
Then dismount and remove the bridle, and at once the horse will depart.
When the horse has left, say, ‘I conjure you [spirits] by all the aforesaid
things, and by all those things that have power against you, that you should
swear always to compel that horse to come to me.’ They will swear and
promise to do so at once. When they have sworn, tell them to withdraw in
safety.36 When they have gone, leave the circle and erase it totally, and take
the bridle with you.
And when you wish the horse to come, say, shaking the bridle, ‘Lutrayth,
Feremim, Oliroomim’, and the horse will come at once. Then place the bridle
in its mouth and ride. You should ride a bit back toward its haunches,37 which
will be gentler, and you should do this each time. And when you want it to
gallop, spur it on or lash it, and it will fly like an arrow, but you will not be
able to fall off, so do not fear. And when you wish to dismount, it will never
depart until you have removed the bridle from its mouth, whereupon it will
disappear at once.
We have made such bridles very thin, so we can carry them in a small
place, and they can never break or wear out because of the consecration.
One should note that if the circle given above is inscribed on horsehide
with the blood of a horse and with the tooth of a white horse, and then is
shown to horses, they will die at once. And if you carry it with you, written in
this manner, no horse can come near you. And Socrates speaks of the power
of this circle in his book of magic.
The figure shown is a single circular band, with a square inscribed, and a circle
inside the square. Short bars extend outward from the middle of each side of the
square and touch the inner side of the circular band. Names of the cardinal
directions flank each of these bars. ‘The place of the master’ is marked in the
center of the circle. The band contains the names Lantrayth, Feremni and
Oliromim,38 plus astronomical and other signs.
Four points about this experiment call especially for comment. First, as in
other illusionist experiments, but not typically in other ones, the spirits conjured
come in the form of courtly figures, in this case knights, which reinforces the


--- PAGE 75 ---
aura of courtly romance intended to characterize these texts. Second, the means
for control over the horse is a bridle, which should not be surprising, since that is
the usual purpose of a bridle, except that in this case the instrument of control is
used in unconventional ways and becomes more an effective symbol of the
magician’s power than a practical implement. Third, the circle which serves to
gain control over a demon in the form of a horse can also, differently employed,
be used to threaten an actual horse; while these illusionist experiments may not
be overtly concerned with establishment of power relations (as are the
psychological experiments to be examined in the next chapter), they do entail the
exercise of power, sometimes over a human agent such as the emperor, and in
this case (as in the tale from the Rawlinson manuscript) over an animal. Fourth,
the term used for ‘shake’ or ‘shake violently’, squassare, may possibly suggest
that this material derives from an Italian source. That verb passed over into
modern Italian, and may be more expected in Latin texts from Italy than in those
from elsewhere.
The three other experiments for obtaining a horse are much simpler. In one
(no. 14) the master looks toward the eastern sky, kneeling and with folded hands
as if he were in prison, and with firm hope of obtaining his will he says a
‘prayer’ seven times to the ‘most high and benign king of the east’, adjuring him
to send an ‘airy spirit’ on which he can ride to a specified place. A horse comes,
and the master conjures it to carry him to that place without danger or
disturbance. When he arrives at his destination he thanks the king of the east for
bestowing this favour, and offers to serve him forever and obey his commands,
‘and may his name be praised forever’. Another experiment (no. 17) is
exceptional in that it does not begin with a conjuration, but with merely the
inscription of magic names. The master writes six of these on the door of a
vacant house, at twilight, ‘in the Hebrew manner’, then he withdraws for a
while. When he returns he finds a horse ready. He conjures it to carry him
without harm or trouble to a specified place. He may then mount it confidently,
for it cannot harm him. When he arrives at his destination he dismounts and
takes the horse’s bridle. Having finished his business, he shakes the bridle
vigorously and repeats the conjuration to summon the horse. In the third of these
simple experiments (no. 43) the master again writes a series of names on the
door of a vacant house, at dusk, with bat’s blood, then withdraws for a brief
time. When he returns he finds a horse awaiting him. After he has ridden the
animal, he dismounts, removes the bridle, and hides it underground. When he
wishes to return, he retrieves the bridle and shakes it, whereupon the horse


--- PAGE 76 ---
returns at once. He then repeats the conjuration, plus the words ‘kostolya, elogo,
yetas’, and off he rides.
Other experiments for illusory means of transportation
In addition to these four experiments, the handbook provides two similar ones,
both complex, for conjuring a magical ship (no. 8) and a flying throne (no. 15).
The ship will sail quickly over the seas, wherever one wants, with whomever
one wishes. The master first fasts on a Monday, then goes out under a waxing
moon to a remote place with the rib of a dead man or woman. Having sharpened
a point on the rib, he uses it to trace a circle with a horizontal band across the
centre and a vertical band across the top semicircle (forming an inverted version
of the T–O pattern commonly found in medieval world maps). Superimposed on
this design is a crescent shape, possibly representing a ship, with two small
circles below it. The place of the master and his companions is marked at the
bottom of the crescent, and ‘East’ is marked toward the bottom. This circle is the
‘insignia’ of the spirits to be invoked. The master enters the circle at the
designated spot and fumigates it with the marrow of a dead man. He will hear
voices in the air. Holding the rib in his right hand, he conjures eight spirits to
come without delay. He then sees eight sailors, who will announce in reverential
tone that they have been sent to fulfil his command. Before the ship may be
employed, the spirits must take an oath to fulfil the master’s wishes. Then he
commands them to transport the circle and those within it to a specified place.
They do so, and it will seem as if the company is sailing on the high seas. In a
brief time, they arrive at their destination. When he has arrived at his destination
he can command the spirits to return him quickly to the point of departure, and
they will do so. Then he gives them permission to leave. When they have done
so, he destroys the circle and buries the rib. He can make the spirits swear that
they will repeat their service upon demand: whenever he wishes to sail again, the
master makes a circle with iron, wood, his finger, or anything else, and tells his
companions to enter at the specified place without fear, then he invokes the eight
spirits by virtue of the oath they have already taken, ordering them once again to
transport him where he wishes to go, and eight sailors will appear and transport
him, within an hour, in a ship; when he wants to return, they will take him back.
In one key respect this experiment differs from others for means of
transportation: the transport comes with the spirits’ appearance, not at a later
stage after they have sent a spirit specifically delegated for the purpose. But as in


--- PAGE 77 ---
other experiments involving transportation, the third stage is a return to the
master’s original location, and then there are measures for repeating the
experiment.
The greater part of the elaborate and fanciful experiment to obtain a flying
throne (no. 15) is a ritual for summoning the throne itself; spirits themselves do
not appear overtly. The text plunges directly into the instructions, with no
introduction. The master must go to a high and secret place when the weather is
serene, with no wind. He says various prayers (the Ave Maria, part of Psalm 50,
the Lesser Doxology, etc.), then makes a circle, into which he places three jars
with him, and he casts into one jar ashes and flour, into another fire and salt, into
the third water and chalk. He sits in the middle of the circle and calls the king of
the clouds to send three guides (or spirits with the rank of duke, duces) to carry
him without harm or danger to the place he wants to go. A small cloud appears,
and from the three jars he hears voices calling, ‘Rise up! Rise up! Rise up!’ After
thrice saying a conjuration, the master sees a throne in the midst of the cloud. He
ascends it and conjures the three guides to carry him without delay, without harm
or danger to body or soul. The later part of the text is much concerned with
defence against adversaries during the flight. If the rider perceives in flight that
someone is trying to harm him by causing the throne to descend toward the
south, he conjures the spirit Baltim, who comes and brings a storm upon the
adversary. If the harm comes from other directions, other spirits are conjured in
defence. If storms, serpents, birds or other terrifying things appear above the
master on his way, he conjures a certain king to remove these terrors. Perhaps
the most extraordinary feature of this experiment is the sense of peril, which
comes not from the potential treachery of the spirits conjured, nor from the
danger of breaking the charm (perhaps by making the sign of the cross) and
plunging from a great height, but rather from unspecified adversaries,
presumably spirits inimical to those invoked. Whether the aiding or the opposing
spirits qualify as ‘spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places’ (Eph.
6:12) remains unclear; the writer might claim that the spirits on both sides are
neutral, or capable of both good and evil, help and harm.
Experiments for invisibility
The theme of magical invisibility by means of a ring, a cape or some other object
is, of course, ancient. The ring of Gyges is one of the best known manifestations
because it provides the basis for a classic thought experiment regarding the


--- PAGE 78 ---
virtue of a person whose invisibility allows him to act with impunity.39 Probably
the most commonly recommended means for becoming invisible in medieval
works on magic was to carry an opal on oneself, so that its brilliance would blind
all potential viewers – a method that is supposed to have worked for Constantius
Africanus.40
The Munich handbook contains one complex experiment and two simple ones
to make the magician invisible. The complex one (no. 11) provides a cloak of
invisibility:
I shall treat also of the art of invisibility, unknown in these days to nearly all.
When you wish to become invisible and insensible to all beings, both
rational and otherwise, first, under a waxing moon on a Wednesday, in the
first hour of the day, having remained chaste for three days beforehand, and
with cut hair and beard, and dressed in white, in a secret place outside of
town, under a clear sky, on level ground, trace a circle such as appears here,
with a magnificent sword, writing these names and everything shown along
with them.
When this is done, place the sword toward the west, on [the name] Firiel.
And while you have it placed there, have a vessel in which there is fire with
frankincense (thus), myrrh and other incense (olibano), and with the smoke
from these go about the circle, suffumigating it, begining and ending with
[the name] Firiel. When you have done this, take blessed water and sprinkle
yourself and the circle, saying, Asperges me, Domine, ysopo … [Ps. 50:9
Vulg.]. When you have done this, kneel facing the east, and in a strong voice
say, ‘I, so-and-so, conjure you, O Fyriel, Mememil, Berith, [and] Taraor,
powerful, magnificent, illustrious spirits, in whom I place all my trust, by the
one, inseparable and undivided Trinity … that all four of you should come
here with utmost humility, bound, constrained, and sworn to carry out my
command, whatever I ask of you. Come without delay …’
When you have said this invocation four times – once toward Firiel, once
toward Melemil and toward Berith and Tarator – four spirits will at once be
present in the circle, saying to you, ‘Tell us what you wish, and we will obey
you completely.’ You will say to them, ‘I wish a cloak of invisibility, which
should be thin and incorruptible, so that when I wear it no one can see me or
sense my presence.’ When you have said this, one will withdraw, and within
an hour will bring forth a cloak, which you asked them to bring you. They
will reply that they cannot give it to you until you first give them your white


--- PAGE 79 ---
garment; you will give it to them, and when you have do so they will give
you the cloak. One of them will at once put on the garment given to them;
you likewise should at once put on the cloak. When you put it on, you will
say to the spirits, ‘Go in peace’, and at once they will withdraw. And when
they depart, you should leave the circle, carrying the sword.
On the third day, return there with the cloak, and you will find your
garment, which you will take. Be sure to remember; if on the third day you do
not return, or you do not take the garment left there, on the fourth day you
will find nothing, but in seven days you will die. Having taken it on the third
day, you will burn it in the same place. And know that when you burn it you
will hear great lamenting and complaining. And when you burn it, sprinkle
the ashes in the air, saying, ‘I conjure you, Firiel, Melemil, Berith, [and]
Taraor, by your virtue and power, and by all things having power against you,
to have no virtue or power to harm me by this cloak, but may Jesus Christ
protect and defend me …’ When you have said this, take blessed water and
sprinkle the cloak, saying, ‘I conjure you, cloak, by the Father and the Son
and the Holy Spirit, and by this water, that whenever I put you on, no one
may sense my presence or see me….’
The figure required here is a plain circle, with the positions east, south, and west
labelled, a sword lying toward the east (with its point near the centre), the
position of the master inscribed near the center, and the names Firiel toward the
west, Melemil to the south, Berith to the east, and Taraor to the north, along with
two characters. One of the most striking features of the experiment is the
suggestion that when the master burns the returned garment he will hear
lamentation and complaint, as if the garment, like the book Antoninus of
Florence is said to have burned, was infested with malign spirits, contained
within it in such a way that they were subject to the will of the person who
disposed of the physical object.
The two simple experiments in this category are in different ways
exceptional: the first (no. 21) because the techniques are without parallel in this
manual, and the second (no. 45) because it not only entails a sacrificial offering
to the demons but explicitly states that these spirits are worthy of sacrifice. The
first of these experiments (which again has no introduction) requires the
practitioner to eviscerate a black cat born in March, cut out its heart and eyes,
and insert a heliotrope seed in place of each eye and two such seeds in the
mouth, while saying a conjuration for invisibility. Then he buries the body in a


--- PAGE 80 ---
closed garden, and waters it for fifteen days with human blood mixed with water,
whereupon a plant will grow. He determines which of the plant’s seeds bears the
power to make him invisible by testing each seed: repeating a series of names,
he takes a mirror and puts the newly grown seeds into his mouth, one by one,
beneath his tongue, and when he finds the seed that causes invisibility he
vanishes from the mirror.41 In the second experiment (no. 45) the master takes a
white dove and a sheet of virgin parchment and on a Saturday night goes to a
stream by a crossroads. He sacrifices the dove and says, ‘O you to whom
sacrifice is due, aid in fulfilling my will’; he repeats this formula while facing in
each of the cardinal directions. Then he inscribes a figure (a complex sign, with
mainly horizontal elements and elaborations) with the dove’s blood. Before
sunrise he returns, and he finds another sheet with a coin enclosed; when he
binds this to his hair he becomes invisible. He must be sure to leave the dove and
the parchment behind, presumably as sacrifices to the spirit. The text does not
say how to undo the invisibility, but presumably it suffices to remove the seed
from one’s mouth (taking care meanwhile not to swallow) or the sheet from
one’s hair.
Power over life and death
As we have seen, the term ‘necromancy’ was used interchangeably in medieval
parlance with various forms of ‘nigromancy’, which could be taken to mean
‘black magic’, or more literally ‘black divination’. One possible reason for the
conflation of these terms and concepts was the widespread assumption that when
one engaged in necromancy in the original sense, conjuring the spirits of the
deceased, the spirits which in fact appeared were demons in the forms of the
dead. Most famously, the shade of Samuel conjured by the witch of Endor (I
Samuel 28) was taken to have been a demon in the guise of Samuel.42 While
‘necromancy’ was most often used in later medieval parlance for the conjuring
of demons, necromancy in its original sense was not unknown in the magic of
the era. The Rawlinson necromantic manuscript, for example, gives procedures
for raising the shades of the dead.43 The Munich handbook comes closest in an
experiment (no. 10) by which the necromancer can make a living person appear
dead or a dead person appear alive:
When you wish to infuse a spirit into a dead person, so that he appears alive
as he was previously, this is the procedure to follow. First have a ring made of


--- PAGE 81 ---
gold. Around the outside these names should be carved: Brimer, Suburith,
Tranauit; on the inside, these names: Lyroth, Beryen, Damayn. When the
names have been carved, on a Sunday before sunrise, go to running water and
place the ring in it, and let it remain there for five days.
On the sixth day, take it out and take it to a tomb, and place it inside, so
that it remains there on Friday and Saturday. On Sunday, before sunrise, go
outside of town under a clear sky, in a remote and secret place, and make a
circle with a sword, and on it write with the sword the names and figures that
appear here.
When this has been inscribed, enter into it [the circle] as is designated, and
place the sword beneath your knees, and, facing south, recite this conjuration:
‘I conjure you, all the demons inscribed on this ring’ – which you should have
in your hand – ‘by the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and by
almighty God, maker of heaven and earth … that all of you, constrained and
bound to my will and my power, should proceed hither in benign form, so
that I will not fear, and should consecrate this ring in such a way that it may
possess this power, namely that whenever I place it on the finger of a dead
person, one of you will enter him, and he will appear alive as before, in the
same likeness and form …’
When you have said this once, six spirits will at once appear at the circle,
requesting the ring, which you will give them. When you have given it, they
will depart, and you likewise should leave the circle, taking the sword with
you, and not destroying the circle.
On the sixth day, return with the sword, and say, facing south, ‘I conjure
you, O Brimer, Suburith, [etc.] … that you should come to me now without
delay, bearing the consecrated ring, so that when I place it on the finger or in
the hand of a living person he will fall to the ground as if dead, and when I
take it away he will return to his former state, and when I place it on a dead
person, as aforesaid, a spirit will enter him and he will appear alive as before
…’
When you have said all this four times, first toward the south, and likewise
toward the west, then toward the north and toward the east, you will see
toward the east someone coming on horseback, who, when he arrives at the
circle, will say, ‘So-and-so’ – naming the names written above – ‘send you
this consecrated ring, but they say they cannot come to you because it is not
fitting; you will experience [or test] the power of the ring, and if it does not
have the power that you requested, they say they are prepared to come to you


