SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 22/39  |  CHARS: 500917-525917 of 911762
============================================================

25 Aron Gurevich, Medieval Popular Culture: Problems of Belief and Perception, trans. János M. Bak
and Paul A. Hollingsworth (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; Paris: Editions de la Maison des
Sciences de l’Homme, 1988), 65–8 and Jeffrey B. Russell, ‘Saint Bonaventure and the eccentrics’, Church
History, 33, (1964), 235–47, esp. 237–8. For general information on the cult of angels see A.A. Bialas,
‘Devotion to angels’, The New Catholic Encyclopedia, 1 (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967), 514–15, and the
sources cited there.
26 Iohannes de Francofordia, Quaestio, utrum potestas cohercendi demonis fieri possit per caracteres,
figuras atque verborum prolationes, in Joseph Hansen, ed., Quellen und Untersuchungen zur Geschichte


--- PAGE 203 ---
des Hexenwahns und der Hexenverfolgung im Mittelalter (Bonn: Georgi, 190l; repr. Hildesheim: Olms,
1963), 71–82.
27 Page 72, citing the depiction of Leviathan: Et eciam Iob 4. [i.e. 41:24 Vulg.] dicitur: non est potestas
super terram, qui ei comparetur, et textus ibidem loquitur de dyabolo.
28 Gerson, OEuvres complètes, 10, pp. 88f., art. 9, 17.
29 Fols 77v–78r.
30 M.R. James, ‘Twelve medieval ghost-stories’, English Historical Review, 37 (1922), 418f.
31 The Malleus maleficarum, ii.1.4, pp. 109–14, discusses the nature of these assumed bodies in
connection with the nature of incubi, and concludes that the demons confect ad hoc flesh from the elements
in the surrounding air.
32 De Nigromancia of Roger Bacon, iv.3, ed. and trans. Michael-Albion Macdonald (Gillette, NJ:
Heptangle, 1988), 33, 56f.
33 On demons in the form of beasts, see Russell, Lucifer, 209: ‘Until the eleventh century the Devil was
generally portrayed either as a human or as an imp, and this tendency persisted in Byzantine art. In the
West, beginning in England about 1000 and spreading to Germany about 1020 and then beyond, the Devil
tends to be a monstrous composite of human and animal.’
34 St. Athanasius, ‘Life of St. Anthony’, ch. 9, in Roy J. Deferrari, et al., trans., Early Christian
Biographies (Washington: Catholic University of America Press, 1952), 144.
35 Fol. 27v.
36 It is evidently the dragon that is two-headed, although the context does not make the point clear.
37 On this point see the Malleus maleficarum, ii.1.4 (p. 109), and Thomas Aquinas’s Summa theologiae,
I.51.2 ad 4.
38 F.C. Conybeare, ‘The Testament of Solomon’, Jewish Quarterly Review, 11 (1899), 1–45.
39 On this material see generally Butler, Ritual Magic, 47–89, and Arthur Edward Waite, The Book of
Ceremonial Magic (repr. Secaucus, NJ: Citadel, 1961), 58–66.
40 Gerson, OEvres complètes, 10, p. 90, art. 25.


--- PAGE 204 ---
I
8
The Magic of Circles
and Spheres
f necromancy was in one sense chiefly the art of conjuring, it was also widely
associated in the popular mind with the drawing of magic circles. The
Fasciculus morum says of necromancers (nigromantici) first of all that they
‘raise devils in their circles that are expected to answer their questions’, and only
secondly that they also ‘make figures of people in wax or some other soft
material in order to kill them’.1 In The Pilgrimage of the Life of Man, the
messenger of Necromancy traces a circle on the ground, with characters and
figures, and informs the Pilgrim that his invocation causes the spirits to answer
and obey, and they cannot withstand his prayers, characters, and conjurations
because he holds a commission from ‘the King’, meaning God, to whom they
are subject.2 The Yorkshire manuscript mentioned earlier tells how one man used
a magic circle in conjuring not a demon but a ghost:
… he came to the assigned place and made a large circle with a cross, and it
had on it [the opening words of ?] the four gospels and other sacred words,
and he stood in the middle of the circle, placing four small reliquaries in the
form of a cross on the rim of the circle, and saving words such as ‘Jesus of
Nazareth’ and so forth were inscribed on the reliquaries. Then he waited for
the spirit to arrive. Finally he came, in the form of a goat, and three times he
went around the circle, going ‘a-a-a, a-a-a, a-a-a’. But when he was conjured
he fell to the ground and rose up again in the form of a man of great height,
horrid and gaunt, like one of the dead kings shown in paintings.3
Like conjuration, the use of magic circles appears to have spread beyond the
sphere of clerical necromancy. For example, a woman charged with witchcraft at
Provins in 1452 was said to have belonged to a ‘sect’ of witches that conjured
the Devil by tracing three evidently concentric circles on the ground.4 What this
incident probably represents is not a popular tradition parallel to that of the


--- PAGE 205 ---
necromancers, but influence from their tradition.
Form and preparation of the magic circle
These magic circles could at times be very simple, but sometimes they were
elaborate diagrams made on specially constructed platforms.5 The Sworn Book
ascribed to one ‘Honourius, son of Euclid’, gives elaborate instructions for
constructing a magic circle. The magician must construct a square platform
fourteen feet across of good and well dressed stone, or of tile, or (if necessary
because of poverty) of pure earth. On top of it he must fashion a circular
platform, seven feet across and three feet high. The site must be ritually purified
and consecrated, with blessings, incense, and invocation of angels. Then,
presumably on top of the circular platform, he must make two concentric circles,
carved with a new knife or inscribed in chalk, with the names written in the band
between the circles. In a later chapter the magician is told that in an elaborate
ceremony of consecration he should carve or inscribe four concentric circles, the
smallest nine feet and the largest twelve feet across, with names of God and of
angels in the bands and the seal of Solomon in the centre. Then there must be
two concentric squares around these circles, with the corners pointing in the
cardinal directions, names of God between the squares, and lighted censers
placed within two smaller concentric circles at each of the four corners.6
The De nigromancia associated with Roger Bacon provides even fuller and
more elaborate instructions for preparing and consecrating a magic circle. The
magician must have a square ‘secret vault’ constructed in some remote place,
twenty feet to each side at most, and twenty feet high at least, with windows
facing the cardinal directions. Inside this building he must inscribe two
concentric circles in chalk, fifteen feet at the most across, with characters and
names of spirits inscribed. There are distinct kinds of circles for spirits of the air,
fire, water, and earth, but the treatise is not altogether clear regarding the
distinguishing features. The consecration entails, among other things, having a
priest say a mass in honour of Saint Cyprian, famous for having been a
magician.7 A later chapter gives further details: the pentacle of Solomon should
circumscribe the circle; the Tetragrammaton must be inscribed on all circles,
because without it ‘all conjurations of the spirits will fail, and no spirit will
answer truth, but falsehood’; and an appropriate time must be observed for
making the circle.8 Elsewhere the treatise recommends a circle for discovery of
hidden treasure that is inscribed on a circular sheet of vellum eight feet in


--- PAGE 206 ---
compass, which should have ten loops with which it can be pinned to the
ground.9
The Rawlinson necromantic manuscript is more interested in conjurations
than in circles, but does prescribe and depict circles in connection with some of
its conjurations, sometimes very simple, sometimes with pentangles and words
and characters inscribed, and says at one point that the master should trace a
circle with the point of his sword. There as elsewhere, however, circles may be
inscribed not on the ground, as a location for conjuring, but on a moveable
object, as a means for gaining power over the spirits: at one point the reader is
told to draw a circle on a tablet, with the name ‘Satan’ inscribed in it.10
Magic circles in the Munich handbook
The circles in Clm 849 consist most fundamentally of single circular bands or
varying numbers of concentric bands, between two and four.11 Beyond this
simple composition are various complicating factors: a single band inscribed
within a square (no. 1); an inverted triangle inscribed within the outer boundary
of a single band (no. 15); a double band divided into ten segments, and a
rectangle inside the circle divided into six sections (no. 18); a double band with
its interior divided into six wedges (no. 22); a triple band with a cross dividing
the interior into four wedges (no. 40); a square inscribed in a single band, with a
circle inside the square, and short bars extending outward from the middle of
each side of the square and touching the inner side of the circular band (no. 9); a
single band bisected by a horizontal band, while a vertical band bisects the upper
portion of the circle, and a closed crescent shape (presumably representing a
ship) appears in the upper two-thirds of the circle, with two dots beneath it at the
prow and the stern (no. 8). Another experiment (no. 13) is unusual in having not
a circle but a shield with a single band around its edge.
Inscriptions are of various kinds:
1. Four cardinal directions, with east on top in the fashion of traditional
medieval cartogarphy: nos 1, 6, 9, 15, 36; at times not all the directions are
explicitly given (nos 8, 10, 11).
2. Positions of the master and child medium: The position of the master is
often marked in the centre of the circle, with the term Locus magistri (nos 3,
7, 9, 12) or simply Magister (nos 10, 11). The circle for no. 8 marks the
position with the inscription Hic magister cum suis sociis. No. 1 has Nomen


--- PAGE 207 ---
magistri, de tali ordine and Nomen discipuli are marked in the center. The
positions for no. 22 are in the literal sense eccentric: inscriptions indicate that
the master and boy are to sit on top of pentagrams on opposite sides of the
circle: Hic sederat [=sedeat] puer super signum (at the top), and Hic sedeat
magister super signum a latere sinistro (at the bottom). Toward the middle of
the circle for no. 40 are word fragments and N.p. (presumably for Nomen
pueri).
3. Names of spirits, given most frequently within the bands: no. 1 has the
names of the spirits Belial, Satan, Osendior, Matalot, Belzebub, Lucifer,
Sententino and Apolin inscribed in and around its band; no. 2 has Oreoth,
Pinen, Otel, Tryboy, Noryoth, Belferith, Camoy, Astaroth, Sobronoy and
Sismael inscribed in its band, and the names Mirael and N. (for the name of
the intended victim) inscribed in its centre; no. 3 has the names Rator,
Lampoy, Despan, Brunlo, Dronoth, Maloqui, Satola, Gelbid, Mascifin,
Nartim and Lodoni; no. 6 has the names Oymelor, Symofos, Manoir, Faubair,
Demefin, Rodobayl, Tamafin, Abelutabel, Lamair, Tentetos, Leutaber,
Rimasor, Masair, Lotobor, Tatomofon and Sirama; no. 7 has O Vsyr, Salaul,
Silitor, Demor, Zanno, Syrtroy, Risbel, Cutroy, Litor Onor, Moloy, Pumotor,
Tami, Oor and Ym, spiritus armigeri, in its bands; no. 8 has the names Fyron,
Dyspil, Onoroy, Sysabel, Cotroy, Tyroy, Rimel and Orooth; no. 9 has the
names Lantrayth, Feremni and Oliromim; no. 10 has O Brimer, Suburith,
Tranauit, Lyroth, vnq (?) Berien, Damayn; no. 11 has the names Firiel to the
west, Melemil to the south, Berith to the east, and Taraor to the north; no. 18
has the names Latranoy, Iszarin, Bicol, Danmals, Gromon, Zara, Ralkal,
Sigtonia, Samah and Meneglasar written in the ten segments of its outer band,
corresponding figures in its inner band, and the letters F-L-O-R-O-N in the
six sections of its inner rectangle; no. 12 has the invocation Tu Belial, tu
Astaroth, tu Paymon, ad hoc sitis opus michi adiutores; no. 13 has the names
Asyel, Castyel, Lamsiyel, Rabam, Erlain, Olam and Belam in horizontal
bands; no. 23 has the name Lylet (or Bylet) inscribed in its centre.
4. Sacred names: no. 16 has Agla / Michael virtus dei / Gabriel fortitudo /
Emanuel Paraclitus / Raphael medicina dei / Alpha et O, Oli, Ely /
Tetragrmaton, amen / Agla inscribed inside a double band, with a cross inside
a square before and after each line of text; no. 36 has four divine names
outside its triple band: Sabaoth at the top, Tetragramaton at the right, and
Adonay at the bottom, Agla at the left.


--- PAGE 208 ---
5. Miscellaneous inscriptions: no. 15 has characters in what appears to be
pseudo-Hebrew; to the right of the circle for no. 22 is a rectangular signum
with the inscription Esto altissimus, vnus, eternus, amen, on five horizontal
bands; no. 40 shows the word onus (possibly for On) four times.
Various types of sign and other objects also appear:
1. Pentagrams (or pentangles). No. 6 has a pentagram inscribed in its centre;
no. 10 has a pentagram inscribed; no. 23 contains two pentagrams with the
name On just beyond each point inscribed in the upper and lower wedges, and
two more to the lower left and right of the circle.
2. Astronomical characters and miscellaneous figures: no. 6 shows radiating
figures extending across its bands on the upper left, upper right, lower right,
and lower left; nos 9 and 10 show astronomical and other signs alongside the
names of spirits; no. 11 has two figures.12
3. Objects to be used in the experiments: no. 6 shows a sword at the top,
extending downward, with its point on the top of a pentangle); no. 11 shows a
sword lying toward the east with its point near the centre; no. 15 has dots
evidently denoting positions for jars. These objects are presumably not meant
to be drawn, but rather positioned where they are shown. Alongside the circle
for no. 2 runs a vertical band labelled Hoc [or hic] est candela and inscribed
with the names Oreoth, Pinen, Ocel, Triboy, Norioth, Belferith, Camoy,
Astaroth, Sobronoy.
When prayers are shown inscribed on the bands, these may be meant to be
inscribed, but are perhaps more often to be recited as the circles themselves are
traced:
The first circle for no. 39 has In nomine Patris et Filij et Spiritus Sancti; In
nomine indiuidue trinitatis, Alpha et O, deus et homo; and Ego te facio per
illum qui creauit celum et terram, mare et omnia que in eis sunt in its three
bands.
The second circle for no. 39 has In nomine Patris et Filij et Spiritus Sancti,
Celi enarrant in the middle band, and Deus tuum [sic] regi da in its three
bands.
No. 36 has inscriptions in each of its three bands:  Hunc circulum facio in


--- PAGE 209 ---
nomine dei Patris omnipotentis, qui solo verbo vniuersa creauit in the
outermost;  Hunc circulum facio in nomine dei viui qui humanum genus
humano sangwine redemit in the middle, and 
 Hunc circulum facio in
nomine Spiritus Sancti paracliti, quia [sic] apostolorum et prophetarum
corda sua gracia illustrauit in the innermost. In the upper left, a further
inscription begins in the outer circle and ends in the middle one: Per hoc
signum sancte crucis gracia dei defendat nos ab omni malo.
No. 40 has  Hunc circulum facio in nomine Patris omnipotentis dei, qui solo
verbo cuncta creauit. Dextera domini fecit virtutem, dextera domini exaltauit
me, non moriar sed viuam et narrabo opera domini. Castigans castigauit
dominus in (and extending beyond) its outermost band; 
 Hunc circulum
facio in nomine filij unigeniti dei viui, qui humanum genus proprio sangwine
redemit. Dextera domini fecit virtutem, dextera domini exaltauit me, non
moriar sed viuam et narrabo opera in its middle band; and  Hunc circulum
facio in nomine Spiritus Sancti paracliti, qui corda apostolorum et
prophetarum suorum sanctissimam graciam [sic] illustrauit. Dextera domini
fecit virtutem, etc. in its outermost band.
No. 23 has Deus sanctus, deus omnipotens, deus fortis, deus inmortalis, pater
futuri seculi.
No. 12 gives a modified conjuration that is shown on the circle for no. 12: Tu
Belial, tu Astaroth, tu Paymon, ad hoc sitis [michi deleted] opus michi
adiutores.
One of the experiments in the Munich handbook (no. 7) speaks of the circle as a
representation of the spirits’ habitation, perhaps implying a conception of Hell
related to Dante’s, but the point remains implicit and undeveloped. And in one of
the handbook’s experiments (no. 33) an unusual kind of magic circle is required:
the master goes to a cemetery and gathers as many stones as there are verses in
Psalm 50, and with them he makes a circle, then sprinkles it with verbena.
The function of the magic circle: protection or heightening of power
Magic circles are usually represented in histories of magic as protective
devices,13 and at least sometimes they performed that function. In one of the
exempla told by Caesarius of Heisterbach, a cleric famed for his skill in
necromancy agrees to conjure demons to persuade a knight who does not believe


--- PAGE 210 ---
in them. The cleric inscribes a circle on the ground at a crossroads, and warns
the knight that he must remain within the circle as protection from the demons,
and within this protective confine the knight remains secure (albeit terrified)
when demons and the Devil himself arrive. In another exemplum, individuals
who dare to step outside the circle are immediately attacked by the fiends.14
This notion of the magic circle as a protective device occurs at times in the
magicians’ own writings. In the Rawlinson necromantic manuscript the spirits
are commanded to approach the master ‘beside the circle here inscribed’ (iuxta
circulum hic circumscriptum). Elsewhere the spirits are commanded to come to
the ‘place and circle’ (locum et circulum) ordained for their appearance. The
master is to ‘sign’ or bless the circle with his rod, saying ‘I make this circle in
honour of the Holy Trinity, that [it] may be for him and his companions a place
of protection and a refuge which the demons cannot violate, enter, defile, touch,
or even fly over; they must appear in a place designated for them outside the
circle.’15 The notion of the circle as a protective device is found again in an early
sixteenth-century text pseudonymously ascribed to Cornelius Agrippa.16 But it is
probably not the magicians’ original understanding of how the magic circle
functioned. The circle as a locus of power, enhancing the power of the operator,
is ancient; it appears, for example, in the early Jewish story of Honi the Circle-
Drawer and in the Greek magical papyri.17 The further notion that the circle
protects the magician from demons may well have originated with moralists
such as Caesarius, as a symbolic way of talking about how hazardous it is to
conjure demons, even if it was eventually taken over by the necromancers
themselves.
In the Munich handbook it is clear that the circle is a focus of power meant to
gain control over spirits. The circles have power to convoke the demons (no. 9)
and to terrify them (no. 7). In one case the circle is identified as the insignia of
the spirits being conjured (no. 8). In another experiment the circle seems to be
identified as a representation of the spirits’ dwelling place (no. 7). Apart from its
power over spirits, a circle may be inscribed on horsehide, and then it will exert
power over any horses to whom it is displayed, or keep unwanted horses from
approaching its bearer (no. 9). At one point it is said that the spirits cannot enter
a circle (no. 3), but elsewhere they are said in fact to do so (no. 11). The
instructions for conjuring Mirage in the supplementary sections of the codex do
suggest that the circle has a protective function, more for the magician’s
companion than for the master himself: the master makes a circle with a knife
and has his companion sit inside it, carefully instructing him not to stretch hand,


--- PAGE 211 ---
foot, clothes or hair outside it until all is done, ‘lest through some error he should
seem to enter into danger’.18 The role of the circle in one of the manual’s erotic
experiments (no. 3) is ambiguous: it is clearly a focus of magical power, and it
may also play a protective role. The text says that the larger the circle, the better;
if anything of the master’s should extend beyond the circle, ‘it would be bad for
you’. Does this imply that the circle is a protective enclosure against the assaults
of the demons? Perhaps, but this function is not clearly expressed. At no point
does the author expressly state that the demons may cause harm and that the
circle is necessary for protection; indeed, the experiment is explicitly said to be
without danger. While the master sports with the woman inside his capacious
circle the demons have in fact vanished; there is no sense that they remain as
invisible yet menacing presences. The master’s greatest fear may be not assault
but interruption: having gone to such effort to secure the woman’s presence and
guard the secrecy of his magic, he does not want to be disturbed in his
lovemaking by forces demonic or otherwise, and the circle provides an enclosure
within which his privacy is secure. Exceeding the bounds of this enclosure will
probably have the worst result he envisions: the spell will be broken and he will
be disappointed in his love.
Astral magic
Magic circles are not explicitly linked with the celestial spheres, at least in the
Munich handbook, yet the magic of circles and that involving heavenly bodies
are perhaps related, at least indirectly. In each case the circular form – the perfect
shape, according to ancient Greek thought – was conceived as a centre of power
that radiated outward. The elegance of the simple form, made with a single and
uniform line, seems to have been suggestive of inward-looking strength
combined with maximal power to influence other beings. Even if the magic
circle could also serve as a protective boundary, defining a safe space within
itself, the Munich handbook makes it clear that the circle exerted force over
demons, whether traced on the ground or transferred to a sheet of parchment.
More clearly and perhaps more obviously, in medieval thought, the stars and
planets emitted powers that affected life on earth and could be put to use by a
magician for good or for ill. The possibility of such astral magic was not merely
a belief of the magicians themselves; philosophers and theologians, indeed
educated people generally, accepted the premise that the heavenly bodies
influenced affairs here below.19


--- PAGE 212 ---
In 1441 Eleanor Cobham, the Duchess of Bedford, was tried for treasonous
magic along with accomplices who included Roger Bolingbroke. His part in the
matter is summarized by one contemporary source in these terms:
And a certain clerk, one of the most renowned in all the world in astronomy
and the magical art, master Roger Bolingbroke, was arrested, and publicly in
the cemetery of St Paul’s, with the vestments of his magic and with waxen
images, and with many other magical instruments, he sat in a certain high
throne, so that people from everywhere might see his works; afterwards he
was hanged, drawn and quartered, and his head placed on London Bridge.
This master Roger was one of the most notable clerks in the whole world, and
he was accused on account of … Lady Elianora [Cobham], to whom he was
an advisor in the magic art, and after his death many lamented exceedingly
greatly.
For our purposes it is not necessary to explore all details and implications of the
affair.20 Suffice it to point out that this Bolingbroke clearly was an ‘astronomer’
or astrologer, and surely had cast the horoscope of Henry VI, already an activity
that smacked of treason, but whether he had actually compassed the monarch’s
demise is another matter. In any case, we have here a classic case of the
intersection between astrology, astral magic and necromancy. Whether or not
this particular astrologer was also a necromancer, to lend further force to its
conjurations necromancy clearly did borrow techniques, however superficially,
from the traditions of astral magic derived from Arabic treatises such as Picatrix.
This and similar writings had been translated from Arabic into Western
European languages in and around the thirteenth century and seem to have had
profound influence on necromantic practice. This influence manifests itself in
the Munich manual chiefly in instructions to observe certain astrological
conditions and in the use of fumigations.
In various ways the magical apparatus contained in the Munich manual draws
from the tradition of astral magic. Eleven experiments specify that their
operations, or certain of them, should be done under specified astrological
conditions, which most often entail phases of the moon: the work should be done
under a waxing or waning moon, or in a particular phase of the moon. The day
of the week is sometimes specified. The time of the day may be indicated: the
first hour, before sunrise, morning or noon. Thus, an erotic experiment (no. 12)
must be initiated in the hour of Venus or the hour of Jove, not simply becaus