SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 13/39  |  CHARS: 283284-306992 of 911762
============================================================

ia, 30 (1844), 395f.; W.L. Wardale, ‘A Low German-Latin miscellany of the early fourteenth
century’, Niederdeutsche Mitteilungen, 8 (1952), 11; British Library, Sloane MS 3,132, 56r–56v; Bodleian
Library, Oxford, MS e Mus. 219, fol. 187v, and Wood empt. MS 18, fol. 33v.
30 Book of Secrets, ed. Best and Brightman, 8, 45, 91; Evans, Magical Jewels, 226; Bodleian Library,
Oxford, MS e Mus. 219, fol. 186v (a series of characters to be placed beneath the threshold of a couple who
have quarrelled).


--- PAGE 116 ---
31 Candida Peruzzi, ‘Un processo di stregoneria a Todi nel “400”’, Lares: Organo della Società di
Etnografia Italiana-Roma, 21 (1955), fasc. I–II, 9–11; Cerlini, ‘Una strega reggiana’, 64f.
32 Picatrix: The Latin Version of the Ghaāyat Al-Hakīm, ed. David Pingree (London: Warburg Institute,
1986), 16, 21, 70–72, 113, 115f., 130–32, 156f., 229, 233.
33 Gene A. Brucker, ‘Sorcery in early Renaissance Florence’, Studies in the Renaissance, 10 (1963),
10f.; C. Kayser, ‘Gebrauch von Psalmen zur Zauberei’, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen
Gesellschaft, 42 (1888), 460; Peter Browe, ‘Die Eucharistie als Zaubermittel im Mittelalter’, Archiv für
Kulturgeschichte, 20 (1930), 134–54. For similar use of holy chrism see Cerlini, ‘Una strega reggiana’, 67.
34 Jerzy Zathey, ‘Modlitwa z XIV wieku o charakterze zaklȩcia, majaca zapewnić zonie milość mȩza’,
Biuletyn Biblioteki Jagiellońskiej, 34/35 (1984/85), 63–4; Peter Dronke, ‘Towards the interpretation of the
Leiden love-spell’, Cambridge Medieval Celtic Studies, 16 (1988), 61–75.
35 Thomas of Britain, The Romance of Tristram and Ysolt, ch. 46, trans. Roger Sherman Loomis (New
York: Dutton, 1923), 129–35. On the theme see especially Helen Cooper, ‘Magic that does not work’,
Medievalia et Humanistica, n.s., 7 (1976), 131–46.
36 Nicolaus Eymericus, Directorium inquisitorum, ii.43.8 (Rome: Georgius Ferrarius, 1587); translated
in Alan C. Kors and Edward Peters, eds, Witchcraft in Europe, 1100–1700: A Documentary History
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1972), 84–92.
37 Cambridge University Library, MS Dd.xi.45, fols 137v–138.
38 Paul Fredericq, ed., Corpus documentorum inquisitionis haereticae pravitatis Neerlandicae, 1 (Ghent
and The Hague, 1889–1906), 428f.
39 Braekman, Magische experimenten, 38–40.
40 The conjuration breaks off at this point.
41 Lea, History, vol. 3, 657–59. Cf. Hansen, Quellen, 449; Lea, History, vol. 3, 455f.
42 Margaret Aston, Thomas Arundel: A Study of Church Life in the Reign of Richard II (Oxford:
Clarendon, 1967), 63, 404f.
43 A. Germain, ‘Inventaire inédit concernant les Archives de l’Inquisition de Carcassonne’, Mémoires
de la Société Archéologique de Montpellier, 4 (1885), 305; reprinted in Hansen, Quellen, 454f.
44 Brucker, ‘Sorcery’, 19f., 23, from G. Sanesi, ‘Un episodio d’eresia nel 1383’, Bullettino senese di
storia patria, 3 (1896), 384f.
45 Thomas Wright, ed., A Contemporary Narrative of the Proceedings against Dame Alice Kyteler
(Camden Society, 24) (London: Nichols, 1843), 2.
46 Hartmann Ammann, ‘Der Innsbrucker Hexenprocess von 1485’, Zeitschrift des Ferdinandeums für
Tirol und Vorarlberg, ser. 3, 34 (1890), 29.
47 See the experiment with a hoopoe heart mentioned in Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages, 142,
from British Library, Sloane MS 3,132, fol. 56v.
48 Johann Hartlieb, Das Buch aller verbotenen Künste, des Aberglaubens und der Zauberei, ch. 79, ed.
and trans. Falk Eisermann and Eckhard Graf (Ahlerstedt: Param, 1989), 90f. On the term atzmann in this
context see Leander Petzoldt, Kleines Lexikon der Dämonen und Elementargeister (Munich: Beck, 1990),
25–7.
49 For this suggestion I am indebted to John Leland.
50 See Edward C. Dimock, Jr., The Place of the Hidden Moon: Erotic Mysticism in the Vaisnava –
Sahajiya Cult of Bengal, new edn (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989), 202. I am grateful to Amy
Ong for this reference.
51 Malleus maleficarum, ii.2.3, trans. Montague Summers (London: Rodker, 1928; repr. London:


--- PAGE 117 ---
Pushkin, 1948), 170.
52 The manuscript does not say whether the hair is to be from the woman’s head or from her pudenda. A
famous instance of the magic requiring a woman’s pubic hair occurred in the late sixteenth-century Scottish
trial of Doctor Fian, who thought he had the hair of a young woman but in fact worked his magic over the
hair from a cow, which became passionately attached to him; see James VI/I, Doemonologie, 1597 [and]
Newes from Scotland, Declaring the Damnable Life and Death of Doctor Fian (Bodley Head Quartos, 9)
(London: John Lane; New York: Dutton, 1924).
53 One might have expected a black-handled knife; see Richard P.H. Greenfield, Traditions of Belief in
Late Byzantine Demonology (Amsterdam: Hakkert, 1988), 256, and Richard P.H. Greenfield, ‘A
contribution to the study of Palaeologan magic’, in Henry Maguire, ed., Byzantine Magic (Washington, DC:
Dumbarton Oaks, 1995), 142, n. 83.
54 Or perhaps, rather, ‘if she is anywhere on Earth [in terra omnino]’; in either case, I am reading
consumetur for consumatur.
55 PGM IV.296–329, in Hans Dieter Betz, ed., The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation, Including the
Demotic Spells, 1 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), 44–7; also D.G. Martinez, P. Michigan
XVI.: A Greek Love Charm from Egypt (P. Mich. 757) (Atlanta: Scholars, 1991), and John G. Gager, ed.,
Curse Tablets and Binding Spells from the Ancient World (New York: Oxford University Press, 1992), no.
27, pp. 94–97. For the Egyptian statue see Gager, Curse Tablets, p. 98, fig. 13.
56 Joshua Trachtenberg, Jewish Magic and Superstition: A Study in Folk Religion (New York: Behrman,
1939; New York: Atheneum, 1970), 125–26. Cf. the love spell of Klaudianos, in Betz, pp. 141–2 (PGM
VII.862–918), and the parallels in Greenfield, Traditions of Belief, 266–7.
57 Gager, Curse Tablets, 81.
58 For one precedent see Meyer and Smith, Ancient Christian Magic, 159.
59 The Revelations of Mechthild of Magdeburg (1210–1297), or The Flowing Light of the Godhead,
ii.25, trans. Lucy Menzies (London: Longmans, 1953), 54–8.
60 Richard of Saint-Victor, ‘Of the Four Degrees of Passionate Charity’, in Selected Writings on
Contemplation, trans. Clare Kirchberger, (New York: Harper, 1957), 213–33.


--- PAGE 118 ---
A
5
Learning Hidden and Future Things:
Divinatory Experiments
fifteenth-century manuscript from Yorkshire tells of a lord from
whom food had been stolen.1 As it happened, a labourer employed in
digging, referred to as ‘a great worker and eater’, was staying in a
room in the lord’s house, and when he was hungry he would slip downstairs
to where meat was hanging, and would cook and eat it, even during Lent.
The lord of the house, seeing that his meat was thus cut into, asked his
servants about the matter. They all denied guilt and purged themselves
with oaths, so he threatened to go to a certain necromantic wizard
[maleficum quendam nigromanticum] and find out through him about
this strange affair. On hearing this, the digger was terribly afraid, and
went to the friars and confessed his offence in secret and received
sacramental absolution. The lord of the house went as threatened to the
necromancer, who anointed the fingernail of a young boy, then with his
incantations inquired of him what he saw. [The boy] replied, ‘I see a
menial worker with clipped hair.’ [The necromancer] told him, ‘Conjure
him, then, to appear to you in the most comely form that he can assume.’
And the boy did so, and then declared, ‘Look at that! I see a really
beautiful horse!’ And then he saw a man with the appearance of the
aforesaid digger going down stairs and cutting off pieces of meat, with
the horse following him. And the cleric [i.e., the necromancer] inquired,
‘What are the man and the horse doing now?’ And the boy replied, ‘Look
at that! He is cooking and eating those pieces of meat!’ [The
necromancer] asked further, ‘And what is he doing now?’ And the boy
said, ‘They are going to the church of the friars, and the horse is waiting
outside, and the man is going in and kneeling and speaking with one of
the friars, who is putting his hand on his head.’ Again the cleric asked the
little boy, ‘What are they doing now?’ [The boy] answered, ‘Both of


--- PAGE 119 ---
them have just vanished from my eyes. I cannot see them any more, and I
have no idea where they have gone.’2
The manuscript clearly suggests not only that such divination can in
principle work, but that it works through the cooperation of demons: it gives
the tale the caption, ‘How a penitent thief after confession vanished from the
eyes of a demon’, which is to say that the demon who was providing
information through the boy could no longer do so once the thief had been
absolved. As in other tales of the later Middle Ages, it is assumed that the
demon has a certain power over a soul in a state of sin, and the capacity to
know the sins in some detail, but the wiping away of sins through
sacramental confession removes them from the sphere of demons’
knowledge.3 The narrator also assumes the reader will expect a necromantic
wizard to be a cleric: the fact is mentioned quite incidentally, after the story
is well under way, as a fact the reader might be trusted already to have
known.
The form of magic here related figures prominently in John of
Salisbury’s catalogue of divinatory techniques in his Policraticus. When
John himself was studying Latin grammar as a boy, the priest who taught
him made John and a fellow pupil participate in such activities. The priest
anointed the boys’ fingernails, or used a polished basin, to provide a
reflecting surface in which figures might be seen. He then recited
incantations, which led the fellow pupil to see ‘misty figures’, although
John himself saw nothing.4 One entry in Robert Reynys’s commonplace
book reveals that unfallen angels as well as demons could be invoked by
such means. In Reynys’s version of the ceremony, the conjurer takes a child
between seven and thirteen years of age, places the lad between his legs,
winds a red silk thread around his thumb, scrapes his thumbnail clean, and
writes on it the letters ‘AGLA’. He then says devoutly, ‘Lord Jesus Christ,
king of glory, send us three angels to tell us the truth and not falsehood in all
matters about which we shall inquire.’ Three angels will appear in the boy’s
nail. The boy then repeats a formula addressed to these angels: ‘Angels of
the Lord, I command you by God the Father almighty, who created you and
us out of nothing, and by the virginity of Blessed Mary and Blessed John the
Evangelist and of all virgins, and by the virtues of all the holy names of
God, to show us the truth and not falsehood in all matters about which we
shall inquire.’5


--- PAGE 120 ---
The general term for such divination is ‘scrying’, which is sometimes
subdivided into specific forms such as catoptromancy (divination by means
of a mirror), crystallomancy (by a crystal), cyclicomancy or lecanomancy
(by a cup or basin filled with liquid), hydromancy (by water in a natural
body), onychomancy (by an anointed nail); ‘catoptromancy’ is sometimes
also used as the generic term.6 Synodal legislation as early as the fifth
century condemned specularii who engaged in these practices, and the
condemnation was often repeated. The Fasciculus morum condemns those
phitonici and specularii who gaze into mirrors, bowls, polished fingernails,
and so forth, and claim that marvellous things are thus revealed to them.7 In
1311 the bishop of Lincoln instructed one of his officials to investigate
people who were practising divination by conjuring spirits in their
fingernails and in mirrors, as well as in stones and rings.8 Surely the most
famous of these reflecting surfaces is John Dee’s ‘show-stone’, through
which Edward Kelly and other mediums communicated with angels.9 One
particularly dramatic notion about the magical properties of mirrors is the
legend, most famously associated with Virgil, of a far-seeing mirror by
which a ruler could guard his realm.10 But the notion of perceiving hidden
and future realities in a mirror receives its ultimate extension in the
Neoplatonic notion of the divine mind itself as a mirror in which
particularities can be foreseen, so that it can be said of a saint with the gift
of prophecy that ‘in the mirror of divinity everything to be was present to
him’.11
Johannes Hartlieb tells how a zaubermaister stands behind a child and
recites secret words into his ear in the practice of hydromancy. In
pyromancy as well, he says, the master may set an innocent child in his lap
and lift his hand so he can see the fingernails; then he conjures the child and
his nail with a long conjuration and recites three secret words into his ear.
The master may take oil and soot from a pan and anoint the hand of an
innocent girl or boy so that it shines brightly, then he speaks secret words
into the child’s ear, thus making a vow and forming a pact. Another form of
pyromancy involves engraving many characters and figures around a steel
mirror, then whispering secret words into the ear of boy as a prelude to
interrogation. Alternatively, the child may be made to gaze at a polished
sword – Hartlieb knew one great prince who used an old executioner’s
sword for this purpose – or a crystal. When the master is interrogating the
boy, he asks if he sees an angel; if so, he asks what colour. If the angel is red


--- PAGE 121 ---
that means he is angry, or if black he is very angry, and they must pray
more, light more candles, and offer more incense and other gifts to assuage
his anger, until the angel who appears is white. Hartlieb, echoing the much
earlier judgement of John of Salisbury, confirms the conventional wisdom
when he speaks of such dealings with young children as a form of abuse: ‘I
was often witness to such proceedings and established that the children by
exposure to such words suffered not insignificant harm’.12
Writers might differ in their interpretation of these phenomena. Ibn
Khaldûn explained the scryers’ visions as products of their imaginations: the
scryer does not actually see a vision on the reflecting surface, but rather
imaginative phantoms are projected outward from the eyes onto a sort of
misty veil that forms between the eyes and the object.13 The related
interpretation summarized by Pedro García in the late fifteenth century was
perhaps more influential and deserves to be quoted at some length:
From what has been said and from the conclusions reached [in the
preceding discussion] it is clear that divination of occult things and the
wonders of magical art are brought about by the aid of demons. But
because the proponents of natural magic attempt to reduce [the works of
magic] to purely natural causes, we must inquire whether the divination
of hidden affairs and the accomplishment of wondrous works can be
done thru the power of nature. Let us first ask about the divination of
hidden matters, concerning which some people say and write that a
person can know and divine hidden things naturally, through the power
of the soul. The first manner [of doing so] is by gazing at luminous
bodies and instruments. The principle here is that the acies of the human
mind in one who gazes on such instruments reflects back upon itself, for
the luminosity of the instrument prevents direction or concentration of
the mind on exterior things, and repels it, and turns it back upon itself, so
that it is forced to gaze upon itself. Thus, according to the philosophy of
Plato, if it is purged and cleansed of defilements, which come from the
body and cling to the soul, they see as in a clear and clean mirror, and
when they inquire about all hidden things, or some portion of them, or
some particular hidden thing, it is no surprise that the soul, turned back
into itself, should see such hidden things, for according to Plato the
human soul is created fully inscribed with the forms of all knowable
things, in respect of its intellectual power …


--- PAGE 122 ---
Thus it is, according to the opinion of these magicians, that these
luminous bodies function, and particularly mirrors. When the soul of the
gazer is turned back on itself, it absorbs the attention and fixes the acies
of the intellect in its inward turning, and the more inwardly it is fixed, the
more fully and clearly it turns upon itself and knows and divines hidden
things – and the more it is filled within by God, so that the beholding is
turned into the soul, which can be so turned in to itself and as it were
recollected within itself,14 that the recollection becomes rapture or a state
near to rapture, or ecstasy or a condition near to ecstasy. Thus, those who
operate in works of this kind close the eyes of children, and hold their
eyes tightly closed after they have seen such revelations, until the soul
has returned from this recollection to its original state and is extended in
the usual manner throughout the body and its organs – which is to say,
until it recovers its powers and the organs from which it appears to have
withdrawn, at least somewhat. Otherwise, it is said, there is threat of
danger to the body of the child, or perhaps madness. According to the
philosophy of the Platonists, this is one manner of saving the divinations
of hidden matters through [demonstration] of purely natural causes
without any aid of demons, explicit or secret.15
García goes on to refute these claims, chiefly by mounting an explicitly
Aristotelian refutation of what he takes as standard Platonist psychology;
most fundamentally, he denies that the mind is capable of grasping truth by
being directed to innate knowledge found within itself. Both Ibn Khaldûn
and García’s opponents believe divination can be explained in natural terms,
but the mechanisms they posit are different. For Ibn Khaldûn (a rationalist
intending to deflate the claims of magicians to preternatural knowledge)
attention is focused on an outward substance that reflects projections of the
mind, while for the adversaries of García (Platonist mages intending to
defend their practice against the charge of demonic inspiration) it is directed
instead within the mind itself. Neither view sufficed to convince most
contemporaries that the mind could so readily be converted into an
instrument of divination without demonic aid – but the very attempt to
formulate an explanation in natural terms is historically interesting, whether
the point is to debunk the supernatural pretensions of the diviners or to
defend the validity of the art.
Perhaps most often, those who wrote about these matters did so to


--- PAGE 123 ---
condemn them and warn of their danger. This was the point of John of
Salisbury’s tale of his own early experience. Nicolas Oresme, too, warned
that if young boys stared for long intervals into polished surfaces they might
become blind; worse, they might suffer disfigurement of their faces and
disturbing changes in their personalities.16
Judging from the cases reported in the judicial records and chronicles –
and judging also from the experiments contained in the Rawlinson
necromantic manuscript – divination of this sort seems to have been used
mostly to recover lost or stolen goods. At London in 1311, unspecified
offenders were investigated for invoking spirits to appear in fingernails,
mirrors, stones, rings, and so forth, to reveal the future or the location of lost
objects.17 When a band of monks and canons wished to recover stolen
money near Paris in 1323, their plans involved standing in a circle made
from the skin of a cat; within that circle they were to invoke the demon
Berith, who would answer their inquiries.18 In 1419 a chaplain named
Richard Walker was arrested by the prior of Winchester and tried for using
magical arts, the evidence against him included two books containing
conjurations and figures, and he acknowledged that he had attempted to use
the experiments in one of his books, but to no avail, so he did not believe in
their power.19 In 1440 the Augustinian canons at Leicester accused their
own abbot, William Sadyngstone, of using such arts: when no one confessed
to stealing certain funds, he had allegedly recited incantations, applied
ointment to the thumbnail of a boy called Maurice, asked this medium what
he saw there revealed, and learned that the culprit was one of the canons,
Brother Thomas Asty. The other monks reported the incident to the bishop,
who condemned the abbot for sorcery.20 Again at Westminster during the
1450s, and at London repeatedly in the later fifteenth century, victims of
theft were said to have solicited the services of alleged necromancers
(‘negremaunsers’ or ‘nigromansiers’).21
The Devil being notoriously a liar and the father of lies, it is hardly
surprising to find much concern with the question whether he could be
constrained to tell the truth, even if their keen and subtle minds and long
experience gave them command of exceptionally wide knowledge.22 Peter
Brown has spoken of exorcisms as forms of judicial torture, in which the
demons, like criminals, were compelled even against their will to confess
what they knew.23 When the divination was intended to identify a thief, the
obvious danger – and probably the chief reason for judicial action against


--- PAGE 124 ---
the diviners – was that of false accusation. One is not surprised to read in
the Rawlinson necromantic manuscript, which is devoted mainly to this
kind of magic, that the spirits must be strictly enjoined not to defame any
innocent parties.24 The point is made forcefully in a story from Stephen of
Bourbon, who does not hesitate to ascribe a diviner’s revelation to demons,
but argues how little the spirits can be trusted:
While I was a student at Paris, one Christmas Eve when our companions
were at Vespers, a certain most noted thief entered our hostel, and,
opening the chamber of one of our fellows, carried off many volumes of
law-books. The scholar would have studied in his books after the feast;
and, finding them not, he hastened to the wizards, of whom many failed
him, but one wrought as follows. Adjuring his demons and holding a
sword, he made the boy gaze upon the blade; and he, after many things
there seen, beheld at last by a succession of many visions how his books
were stolen by one of our fellows, his own cousin, whom he thought the
most upright of our fellowship; whom the possessor of the books
slandered not only among the scholars but also among his friends,
accusing him that he had stolen them. Meanwhile the aforesaid thief stole
other things and was detected, whereupon he fled to a certain church
where he lay in the belfry, and, having been duly examined, confessed all
that he had stolen, and where, and what he had done with his thefts.
When therefore certain scholars who lodged hard by our hostel had
found by his means a mantle which they had lost and he had stolen, then
he who had lost his books could scarce rest until he had gone to enquire
of this thief; who answered and told him when and where he had taken
his books, and the Jew’s house where he had pledged them, where also
my friend found them. This I have told that ye may clearly mark the
falsehood of those demons who showed the vision in the sword-blade in
order that they might slander that good man and break the bonds of
charity between those kinsfolk, and bring the man who believed in them
to eternal perdition, both him and his.25
Not surprisingly, the diviners themselves could be subject to prosecution
on the ground of false accusation, as when the sum of £40 was stolen from
John Haddon of Coventry in the mid-1480s, and he consulted necromancers
to find the thieves; they charged one William Lee, a poor man, who had


