SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 4/39  |  CHARS: 68910-93145 of 911762
============================================================

. Swanson, Religion and Devotion in Europe, c. 1215–c. 1515
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), 188.
43 Stanley J. Tambiah, ‘The magical power of words’, Man, n.s. 3 (1968), 175–208; also in
Stanley J. Tambiah, Culture, Thought and Social Action (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1985), 17–59.
44 For an overview of the subject see Richard Kieckhefer, ‘Major currents in late medieval
devotion’, in Jill Raitt, ed., Christian Spirituality, 2 (New York: Crossroad, 1987), 75–108.


--- PAGE 35 ---
I
2
The Munich Handbook of
Necromancy: Clm 849
n other areas of medieval studies, the ‘new philology’ is urging renewed
attention to particular manuscripts, with respect for their variant readings of
texts as well as attention to their physical make-up, evidence of the ways they
were used, the disposition of text on the page, and the relationship between text
and images. The individual manuscript actually put together by medieval hands
and used by medieval readers, rather than the artificial standardized edition, is
increasingly seen as a means for understanding how texts functioned within their
historical culture.1 In the same vein, I wish to propose that for the history of
magic – especially in the late Middle Ages – what we need most is a series of
detailed studies of particular representative manuscripts. This more than any
other type of study will contribute toward a concrete and realistic sense of how
magicians conceived and represented their art, especially if it is possible to
divine the process by which a manuscript was compiled, and to say something
about the mentality of the compiler as it changed through different stages of
compilation.
Clearly there were those in late medieval Europe whose interest in magic was
more theoretical than practical. The monk of Sulby mentioned in Chapter 1
claimed that his fascination with the occult was purely theoretical or speculative.
We know that William of Auvergne and Nicholas Eymericus studied works of
magic in the interest of analysing them, refuting their assumptions, and
condemning them more effectively, while Albert the Great and Roger Bacon had
theoretical interests in the occult that grew in large part out of their scientific
research. There may well have been many less known figures who took a keen
interest in knowing about magic through widely disseminated books such as
Picatrix, even if they did not intend to practise this learning.2
The magical texts probably of greatest interest from a theoretical or scientific
viewpoint were integrally conceived and titled works, even if these were
pseudonymous or anonymous, as opposed to miscellanies. Works integrally


--- PAGE 36 ---
composed by single authors, such as al-Kindi or Marsilio Ficino, or
pseudonymous works ascribed to Aristotle, were likely not only to prescribe
recipes for specific purposes but to develop more or less explicit theories of
occult process. Miscellanies might contain material that implies an
understanding of how magic worked, but they were less likely to develop a
theoretical viewpoint explicitly or coherently. To be sure, this distinction
between an integrally conceived work and a miscellany is by no means rigid.
While Picatrix is one of the great works of Arabic astral magic, infused with a
more or less coherent theory of how magic operates,3 it is also in large measure a
compilation. The Pseudo-Albertan Book of Secrets is systematic in its organizing
principles – it surveys the magical properties first of herbs (nettle, wild teasel,
periwinkle, and so forth, one by one), then of stones, then of beasts, and finally
of the planets – but the contents gathered under these headings might be found in
a miscellany as well, without benefit of organizing structure. Yet while the
distinction between an integrally conceived work and a miscellany is thus not
absolute, it is none the less real.
It is a distinction worth noting, because the works of magic that survive from
medieval Europe include large numbers of miscellanies, and in light of their
importance they have been too little studied. When we read in a judicial record
or a literary work of a magician who owned and used a book of magic, this is at
least as likely to have been a miscellany as an integrally composed treatise. For
while miscellanies may be of less interest from a theoretical viewpoint, they had
compensating features that may often have made them more useful to the
practising magician. The materials assembled in them were selected not to round
off some theoretical notion of magic and its component parts, but because
individually they were taken to be effective. They are documents of use,
analogous to the Greek magical papyri.4 A treatise on conjuration, such as the
Thesaurus necromantiae ascribed to Roger Bacon,5 may explain systematically
how conjuring spirits works, and how different spirits are related to different
astronomical bodies; a necromantic miscellany is more likely to lay out a single
‘experiment’ (experimentum, or, less often, experientia, a concrete and
experienced application of ritual for magical effect), with all of the required
preparations and conjurations, step by step. Historians of magic who are mainly
interested in the field from the perspective of intellectual history or the history of
science are likely to be drawn mostly to single-author treatises, but those
interested in the actual practice of magic and its relevance to cultural, social,
judicial, religious and political history must take a keen interest in miscellanies


--- PAGE 37 ---
as well. Furthermore, whereas an integrated treatise claims to represent a point
of view distilled and isolated from the course of its own development, a
miscellany can more fully serve as a biographical document illustrating moments
in the life of its compiler, presenting its reader with the challenge of discerning
the trajectory of its compiler’s shifting interests.
Willy Braekman has edited the magical portions of a Middle Dutch
miscellany of the fifteenth century, now at the Wellcome Historical Medical
Library in London.6 This manuscript illustrates the variety of magical materials
we might expect to find in a miscellany. Included along with non-magical
material are experiments to identify the thief who has stolen milk, beer or wax;
to become invisible; to see ‘extraordinary things’; to learn about past or future
events; to ease childbirth; to transport oneself rapidly by use of an ointment
(made of seven herbs, goat’s fat and bat’s blood). Various love charms or
summoning experiments are given, as well as a procedure for preventing a wife
from having intercourse with another man by tracing a circle around her genitals
with the tail of a lizard.
In the category of magical trickery or parlour games are experiments to cause
people to grow dirty while bathing; to cause white birds to hatch from the eggs
of black birds; to make a newly hatched peacock white; to cause a woman to
leap naked from her bath; to cause a dog to dance; to compel a horse to stand
still; to hold a serpent in one’s hand without harm, and to cause a horse to
collapse as if dead. More useful are procedures to expel mice and flies by use of
magical images. The manuscript gives the first half of a moon book, explaining
the moon’s influence under each zodiacal sign. And it includes a set of
experiments ascribed to Solomon, and twelve experiments involving snake-skin,
widely attributed to Johannes Paulinus but in fact translated from the Arabic.
Most of the experiments in this manuscript are of natural magic, but not all:
Braekman’s no. 20, especially, calls upon ‘the power and might of these spirits,
Beheydraz, Anleyuz, [and] Manitaynus’, to aid in the magical seduction of a
woman.
Bodleian MS Rawlinson D 252, a fifteenth-century English manuscript,
contains formulas for explicitly demonic magic, to which Frank Klaassen has
called my attention, and which he will describe in his own research now in
progress. It is devoted chiefly to lengthy conjurations intended for divination,
most often to detect thieves, although there are multi-purpose experiments as
well. The bulk of the material is in Latin, but the manuscript also gives lengthy
passages in Middle English. The manuscript differs from Braekman’s Middle


--- PAGE 38 ---
Dutch text in various ways, of which three are immediately apparent: it is more
consistently devoted to magical experiments, most of its operations are for a
particular kind of magic, and it more regularly calls upon the aid of demons. I
will refer to this miscellany on occasion in following chapters.
Codex latinus Monacensis 849
We turn now to the specific focus of this study, a fifteenth-century manuscript in
the Bavarian State Library, Clm 849, and in particular the texts on folios 3
through 108 of this manuscript. (The material on the following folios is related
in kind and approximately contemporary but in different hands and different
languages, and evidently not intended as part of the same compilation.) The
compiler of this main block of material was evidently German; the appended
materials seem to have come from various sources, and one passage contains a
formula in Italian.7 The manuscript is a small one, approximately 8¼ inches high
and 5¾ inches wide. The description of this manuscript in the published
catalogue is nondescript: it appears there as a book of incantations, exorcisms
and sundry bewitchments.8 Lynn Thorndike made no reference to it in his
monumental History of Magic,9 and while he did cite it briefly in a later article
published in a festschrift,10 it has generally been neglected in the literature on
witchcraft and magic. In my survey of Magic in the Middle Ages I highlighted
this text, but without examining it fully and systematically.11 Yet it deserves
careful attention, not because it was influential but because of what it represents.
It is a rare example, essentially intact, of what must once have been a flourishing
genre: the manual of explicitly demonic magic, or necromancy. It is clearly a
miscellany, with little linkage, clustering or other organization of its materials,
and no effort to develop a coherent theory to support or explain the
‘experiments’ it contains. Yet its limitations are also its strengths: the lack of a
systematic framework means that each section, essentially self-contained, has a
coherence and clarity often lacking in more fully developed writings.
The first two folios of the manuscript are missing, a circumstance which may
help to explain how the manuscript evaded detection and thus survived. (Indeed,
it is not uncommon for the first folio of a magical manuscript to be missing.)12
The 107 folios that remain in the main block (rectifying an error in foliation
gives us one extra folio) are devoted primarily to a series of forty-two magic
experiments. Interspersed with these are a version of the Liber consecracionum
(no. 31); a list of spirits, with descriptions of the forms in which they appear and


--- PAGE 39 ---
the functions they perform (no. 34); a manual of astral magic (no. 37); a list of
favourable and unfavourable days for writing magical inscriptions (no. 46); and
a fragment of a chemical prescription, with a gloss in the German language (no.
47).
All but a few of the experiments fall into the three main categories. There are
twelve illusionist experiments, designed to make things appear other than as they
are – to conjure forth an illusory banquet or castle, to obtain a wondrous means
of transportation (usually a demon in the form of a horse) that will carry the
magician across land or water, or to make a dead person seem alive or vice
versa. Seven psychological experiments are intended to have influence on
people’s intellects or wills – to arouse love or hatred, to gain favour at court, to
constrain the will of others, or to drive a person mad. Fully seventeen
experiments are divinatory techniques for gaining knowledge of future, past,
distant or hidden things. Most of these experiments entail catoptromancy, or
scrying: the magician’s assistant, usually a young boy, stares at a reflecting
surface until he sees figures, taken here to be apparitions of spirits, who can
reveal the desired information. As should become clear in following chapters,
these three types of experiment are significantly different from one another: we
find an element of playful fantasy in the illusionist experiments, an often violent
effort at coercion in the psychological ones, and an insistence on detecting truth
and righting wrongs in most of the divinatory ones. Differences in tone and in
purpose are accompanied by variations in technique: conjuring spirits is of
central importance in most of the experiments, but the magic circle plays its
most prominent role in the illusionist rituals, sympathetic magic is more
prevalent in the psychological experiments, and scrying is itself the key to most
of the divination. Rather than a single technique, the necromancy of this
handbook represents a congeries of distinct procedures, most of which can be
sorted fairly neatly into these three categories.
Roughly speaking, we can say that the moving forces behind the magic of the
handbook are the exercise of imagination, the hunger for power and the thirst for
knowledge. To be sure, all three elements are at work in all the necromantic
experiments. One might say that the main issues raised by the practice of
necromancy are those of the relationship between sacrality and power: the
necromancers perceived their art and office as sacred and saw themselves as
invoking the sacred powers of heaven by which they could constrain the equally
numinous but malign and treacherous powers of hell. At the same time, one must
recognize that all these experiments required exercise of imagination and were


--- PAGE 40 ---
inspired in large part by curiosity. Yet the characteristic emphases differ, and we
may safely generalize that it is the imaginative element which dominates in the
illusionist experiments, the quest for power in psychological experiments, and
the yearning for knowledge in the divinatory ones.
All forms of necromancy presupposed and played upon tensions. Basic to
illusionist experiments was the tension between fantasy and reality, all within the
border realm in which readers and practitioners were asked to suspend their
disbelief, or perhaps rather to entertain possibilities that would normally defy
belief but within this ritual context might gain credibility. In psychological
experiments the tension was chiefly between the will of the necromancer and
that of the victim over whom the master sought to exercise his power. In
divinatory experiments it was perhaps most importantly a tension between truth
and deception; these rituals were intended to ascertain truth but left themselves
open to the constant hazard of error.
The materials in the manuscript that do not fit into these three categories are a
procedure for gaining knowledge with the aid of a demon tutor (no. 1), a brief
experiment called the ‘Key of Pluto’ for opening all locks (no. 26), a
fragmentary operation for averting harm (no. 44), a chemical recipe (no. 47), and
generic materials that can serve diverse ends (nos 31, 32, 34, 36, 37, 42 and 46).
Strikingly absent from this compilation are magical rituals for healing and
protection and necromantic procedures for inflicting bodily harm or death. The
judicial records provide ample evidence of necromancers charged with
undermining the health of their victims, and other necromantic literature
evidently provided guidelines for such magic. The compiler of this manuscript
seems not to have been a man of conventional morality or scrupulous
disposition, yet he seems also not to have taken an interest in these kinds of
magic. Not all necromantic manuals were squeamish in this regard. The Key of
Solomon insists that magic must be used only to glorify God and extend
kindness to neighbours, but in fact the work prescribes methods for causing
enmity, war, death, destruction, and so forth; as E.M. Butler says, the intentions
‘seem to have been of the best; but they were literally of the kind which pave the
way to hell’.13
The following table shows the order of the forty-two experiments and other
materials, most of which are assigned to three broad categories: psychological
(‘Psych.’), illusionist (‘Illus.’), and divinatory (‘Divin.’). The numbers for each
item are editorial additions.


--- PAGE 41 ---
Table A. Experiments in Clm 849, fols 3–108
No. Purpose
Fols
Type
1. For gaining knowledge of the liberal arts
3r–5v
2. For causing a person to lose his senses
6r–7v
Psych.
3. For arousing a woman’s love
8r–11v
Psych.
4. For gaining dignity and honour
11v–13v
Psych.
5. For arousing hatred between friends
13v–15r
Psych.
6. For obtaining a banquet
15r–18v
Illus.
7. For obtaining a castle
18v–21r
Illus.
8. For obtaining a boat
21r–23r
Illus.
9. For obtaining a horse
23v–25v
Illus.
10. For resuscitating a dead person
25v–28r
Illus.
11. For invisibility
28r–29v
Illus.
12. For obtaining a woman’s love
29v–31v
Psych.
13. For constraining a man, woman, spirit or beast
32r–33r
Psych.
14. For obtaining a horse
33v–34r
Illus.
15. For obtaining a flying throne
34r–35v
Illus.
16. For finding something in sleep
35v–36r
Divin.
17. For obtaining a horse
36r–36v
Illus.
18. The mirror of Floron, for revelation of past, present and
future
37r–38r
Divin.
19. The mirror of Floron, second version
38r–39v
Divin.
20. Another way of using a mirror
39v–40v
Divin.
21. For invisibility
40v
Illus.
22. For discovering a thief or murderer by gazing into a vessel 41r–42r
Divin.
23. First mirror of Lilith
42r–43r
Divin.
24. For learning about any uncertain thing by gazing into a
crystal
43r–43v
Divin.
25. For information about a theft by gazing into a crystal
43v–44r
Divin.
26. Key of Pluto, for opening all locks
44v
27. For obtaining information about a theft by gazing into a
fingernail
44v–45v,
51r,
46v–47v
Divin.


--- PAGE 42 ---
28. For obtaining information by gazing at a bone
47v–49r
Divin.
29. The true art of the basin
49r–49v
Divin.
30. Twelve names for making spirits appear in a boy’s hand
49v–50v
Divin.
31. The Book of Consecrations
52r–59v
32. Conjuration of Satan/Mirage
59v–62v
33. For obtaining information from a mirror
62v–65r
Divin.
34. List of spirits
65v–65r
bis
35. For obtaining a woman’s love
65r bis–
67v
Psych.
36. Generic preparation for conjuring spirits
67v–68v
Divin.
37. Manual of astral magic
68v–96v
38. For obtaining information about a theft by gazing into a
fingernail
96v–99v
Divin.
39. For obtaining information by gazing into a fingernail
99v–103r Divin.
40. For obtaining information about a theft by gazing into a
fingernail
103r–
105v
Divin.
41. For discovering hidden treasure in sleep
106r–
106v
Divin.
42. The name Semiforas
106v–
107r
43. For obtaining a horse
107r–
107v
Illus.
44. Fragment of an experiment for averting harm
107v
45. For invisibility
107v–
108r
Illus.
46. Favourable and unfavourable days of the month for
inscriptions
108r–
108v
47. Fragment of a chemical prescription (with a note in
German)
108v
After the first (truncated) experiment in the manual, an entire series of
fourteen experiments can be gathered into four clusters, two psychological and
two illusionist:
Cluster I: Nos 2–5 (for inflicting dementia, gaining the love of any woman,
obtaining dignity and honour, arousing hatred between friends)


--- PAGE 43 ---
Cluster II: Nos 6–11 (for obtaining a banquet, obtaining a castle, obtaining a
boat, obtaining a horse, resuscitating a dead person, obtaining invisibility)
Cluster III: Nos 12–13 (for obtaining a woman’s love, constraining a man or
woman or spirit or beast)
Cluster IV: Nos 14–15 (for obtaining a horse, obtaining a flying throne)
Much less of the subsequent material falls into clusters, and the groupings that
do occur are devoted exclusively to divination (unless we count the astral magic
of no. 37 as itself constituting a cluster):
Cluster V: Nos 18–20 (the mirror of Floron, alternative version of same,
another way of using a mirror)
Cluster VI: Nos 22–25 (for discover a thief or murderer by gazing into a
vessel, first mirror of Lilit[h], for knowing about any uncertain thing by
gazing into a crystal, for information about a theft by gazing into a crystal)
Cluster VII: Nos 27–30 (for obtain information about a theft by gazing into a
fingernail, for obtaining information by gazing at a bone, the true art of the
basin, twelve names to make spirits appear in boy’s hand)
Cluster VIII: Nos 38–41 (for obtaining information about a theft by gazing
into a fingernail, for obtaining information by gazing into a fingernail, for
obtaining information about a theft by gazing into a fingernail, for
discovering hidden treasure in sleep)
Before no. 35 the manuscript gives the heading, ‘Here begin good and tried
experiments’, which suggests that the compiler either reordered materials he was
taking from elsewhere or copied this particular experiment from the beginning of
some other compilation. The arrangement of folios within the gatherings is
highly erratic (with many folios excised, and others elsewhere inserted), but
apart from the two folios missing from the front of the manuscript, there is in
general a high degree of continuity both within and between the gatherings, the
main exception being in the apparently careless fragmentation of experiment no.
27.14 This discontinuity existed already, and the folios in question had already
been excised, at the time of the original (fifteenth-century) foliation. In other


--- PAGE 44 ---
words, it is likely that we have the necromancer’s manual nearly intact, and
possible that, despite the codicological complexity, the discontinuities that exist
are the result of the compiler’s carelessness rather than later loss of text or errors
in binding.
Following all this material from fols 3 through 108 are 48 originally separate
folios, 109–156, which again contain miscellaneous material: a conjuration of a
demon named Mirage (given fols 109r–118r and again fols 139r–146r); German
magico-medical prescriptions (fols 119r–132v); a series of divinatory
experiments (fols 133r–134v), with a short ‘prayer’ in Italian (asking God to
ensure the truth of the ensuing revelation) to be recited into the ear of a child
who serves as medium;15 the Liber consecracionum (fols 135r–139r); a lunar
calendar (fol. 146r); instructions for magical circles (fol. 146v); a treatise on
astral magic, the Opus Zoal et angelorum et spirituum eius (fols 147r–154v), and
a German book of lunar astrology (fols 155r–156v). This material will be
discussed here mainly in so far as it resembles or otherwise relates to the main
block of material. The only materials from folios 109–156 that are edited here
are the second version of the Liber consecracionum (given along with no. 31, in
parallel columns) and the conjuration of Mirage (given alongside no. 32, in
parallel columns).
It may seem – and may indeed be – hazardous to devote such attention to a
manuscript that survives in this condition. It is possible that the missing first
folio contained a title, named an author, or gave other information that would be
important for locating this text within its historical context. If we had such
information we might be able to tell more confidently whether this compilation
is in fact unique or whether there are other copies.16 While recognizing the
hazards of proceeding with this project, I am moved to do so chiefly by the
conviction that this is an exceptionally rich and interesting compilation, that one
of the most urgent needs in the history of magic is detailed analysis of specific
manuscripts representative of the materials magicians are likely to have used,
and that such texts thus hold significance going well beyond their meagre
intellectual pretensions. I will make some effort to situate the component parts of
the text within their literary context – to cite sources and parallels. For the most
part, however, I will focus on the contents of this specific compilation, this
microcosm of clerical magic as it was known in the late Middle Ages.
Necromancy and Necromancers in Fifteenth-Century Munich


