SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 17/39  |  CHARS: 378417-403417 of 911762
============================================================

grammaton’, Proceedings of the American
Academy for Jewish Research (1931), 39–67; Kaufmann Kohler, ‘The Tetragrammaton (Shem ham-
M’forash) and its uses’, Journal of Jewish Lore and Philosophy, 1 (1909), 19–32.
51 Robert Eisler, ‘Le Mystère du Schem Hammephorasch’, Revue des études Juives, 82 (1926),
157–9.
52 Samuel Daiches, Babylonian Oil Magic in the Talmud and in the Later Jewish Literature
(London: Jews’ College, 1913).
53 No. B1, text 1, pp. 14–16, with notes on pp. 28–38.
54 No. B1 text 2, p. 16, with notes on p. 38.
55 Ibid., pp. 28–38; Encyclopaedia Judaica (Jerusalem: Keter; New York: Macmillan, 1971–2),
articles on Visions and Jacob of Marvège.
56 If one reads presentare for postulare, the context becomes clearer: rather than asking for the
sword, the magician must give it to the spirit; quo habito then becomes ‘when he has it’ rather than
‘when you have it’.
57 Conrad Kyeser, Bellifortis, ed. and trans. Götz Quarg (Dösseldorf: VDI, 1967).
58 Charles Homer Haskins, Studies in the History of Mediaeval Science (Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1924), 272–98; J. Wood Brown, An Enquiry into the Life and Legend of Michael
Scot (Edinburgh: Douglas, 1897); Lynn Thorndike, Michael Scot (London: Nelson, 1965).
59 Peter Schäfer, The Hidden and Manifest God: Some Major Themes in Early Jewish Mysticism,
trans. Aubrey Pomerance (Albany: SUNY Press, 1992), esp. 49–53, 73–5, 89–95, 109–17, 150–57;
Michael D. Swartz, ‘Patterns of mystical prayer in ancient Judaism’, in Paul V.M. Flesher, ed., New
Perspectives on Ancient Judaism, 6 (Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 1989), 173–86; and
esp. Michael D. Swartz,, Scholastic Magic: Ritual and Revelation in Early Jewish Mysticism
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1996).
60 Thorndike, A History of Magic and Experimental Science, 2 (New York: Macmillan, 1929),
281–3. Papers from a session on an ars notoria manuscript – Nicholas Watson, ‘A fifteenth-century
ritual magic manuscript in the McMaster University Library’, Richard Kieckhefer, ‘The historical
background of the McMaster manuscript’, and Michael Camille, ‘Aspects of art in ars notoria


--- PAGE 153 ---
manuscripts’ – delivered at the 30th International Congress on Medieval Studies, Western Michigan
University, Kalamazoo, Michigan, 5 May 1995, are to be published in a volume edited by Claire
Fanger.
61 Caesarius von Heisterbach, Die Fragmente der Libri VIII Miraculorum des Caesarius von
Heisterbach, ed. Aloys Meister (Römische Quartalschrift für christliche Alterthumskunde und für
Kirchengeschichte, supplementary vol. 14) (Rome: Herder, 1901), 85f.
62 Joseph Hansen, Zauberwahn, Inquisition und Hexenprozeß im Mittelalter, und die Entstehung
der großen Hexenverfolgung (Munich: Oldenbourg, 1900; repr. Aalen: Scientia, 1964), 275–7.


--- PAGE 154 ---
A
6
Formulas for Commanding Spirits: Conjurations
and Exorcisms
collection of sermon exempla from the 1270s relates a story of
considerable interest for later medieval notions of what it meant to conjure
demons. The compiler has been discussing the feast of the Assumption,
the primary Marian feast of the era, and adds this sidelight for its unexpected
relevance to that occasion:
Something further concerning the feast of the Assumption of the glorious
Virgin, which was once told to me and to Brother Roger called Bacon at
Paris, must not be passed over in silence. A certain surgeon from my home
country, and in fact even a native of my very parish, named Master Peter of
Ardene, well known to all clerics from Ireland at that time, had taken a wife
at Paris and in my day was a Parisian citizen. He told me and Brother Roger
Bacon that a certain Spanish magician [magus] was on close terms with him.
Every now and then he would summon the man, and they would come to his
home for company and amusement. So this magician, wishing to return the
favour for Master Peter, took him outside the city one night, with companions
whom he wished to take with himself, and made a circle according to his art,
and called upon his demon [vocavit demonem suum], who, on coming,
responded to all the questions they asked. The man took them there for five
nights, and each night dealt similarly with the demon he summoned. But the
fifth night was the vigil of the Blessed Virgin’s Assumption, so when the
demon was called by the rite of the art as it was passed down he delayed his
coming. And so he was summoned repeatedly, to the point that the devilish
master became much agitated in regard to the devil. Finally the devil arrived,
mourning and sighing, and with deep and plaintive sighs like a boy that has
been beaten he said to them, ‘You people are really strange [Mirum est de
vobis], for the angels in heaven are celebrating the feast of the Virgin Mary,
and you cannot take your rest here on earth!’ Hearing this, they were


--- PAGE 155 ---
astonished, and, not surprisingly, quite fearful. And Master Peter himself
spoke to the demon, as he swore, taking pity on him, and said, ‘What is your
problem?’ [The demon] said to him, ‘Things are very bad for me.’ Then they
dismissed him and returned to their dwellings. So much for the story [Explicit
exemplum].
Behold, O Christian, with what joy you should celebrate the Assumption
of the Blessed Virgin, when even the devil, the enemy of the glorious Virgin,
is compelled to preach that it should be celebrated, and when the angels
celebrate it with so much festivity. When the devil said that he was very bad
off amid this festive solemnity, the reason for this, as a great man whom I
consulted about the matter suggested, is that on the solemnities of the Blessed
Virgin and the saints their punishment is augmented. How this happens I
leave to the judgement of those wiser than myself.1
Among the interesting features of this story, three are of particular relevance
here: first, the suggestion that the demon can be made to appear, but that the
magician’s summons is one element among many in a cosmic network of
potentially competing forces; second, the notion that the demons are subject to
punishment with varying degrees of severity (so that, as we shall see, the
magicians themselves can threaten to bring greater torment upon these fallen
spirits); and third, the representation of the magician and his friends as
adventurous inquirers daring to conjure the forces of hell to satisfy their curiosity
and their quest of forbidden entertainment. The exemplum speaks of the
magician as summoning the demon by a traditional rite, but, being uninterested
in advertising techniques for necromancy, does not give the actual words of
conjuration. From other sources, however, we know what such a rite would
involve.
Central to most of the experiments in the Munich manual are formulas of
varying length that hinge on the terms coniuro, adiuro and exorcizo, which are
essentially interchangeable with each other and with other words meaning ‘I
command’. Indeed, the conjurations are so centrally important to necromantic
experiments that the art of necromancy (as that term is commonly used in later
medieval parlance) can even be referred to simply as the conjuring of spirits.
Reduced to its generic essentials, the typical conjuration is in the form, ‘I
conjure you, thus-and-such spirits, by the holy names, by all the saints of God,
etc., to carry out my will.’ We may speak of the declaration (‘I conjure you’), the
address (‘thus-and-such spirits’), the series of invocations (‘by the holy names,


--- PAGE 156 ---
etc.’), and the instruction (‘to carry out my will’) as the four primary elements
virtually always found in conjurations. While each is of fundamental
significance, they are important in different ways: the instruction indicates the
nature of the command, the address makes it clear whom or what the
necromancer is commanding, the declaration is the expression of intent to
command, and the invocations are the sources of power by virtue of which he is
able to command. In all these essential elements conjurations are analogous to
exorcisms; indeed, the terms ‘conjuration’ and ‘exorcism’ are essentially
interchangeable in medieval usage, regardless of whether the intent is to
summon or to dispel the evil spirits.
Not all the verbal formulas used in the handbook are conjurations: there are
also incantations that serve as glosses interpreting sympathetic magic (especially
in the psychological experiments), and at times prayers addressed to God
(especially in the Book of Consecrations, but note also that no. 22 speaks of a
coniuracio with reference to the prayer Deus, creator omnium rerum, while no.
36 uses the term oraciones for a series of verses beginning ‘I adjure you, King of
kings and Lord of lords …’).2 But because the most common formulas are
conjurations, it is entirely appropriate for necromancy to be known also as the art
of conjuring demons.
The conjurations of the necromancer are in certain respects perhaps similar to
the liturgical curses that Lester Little has analysed: they adapt ritual language to
purposes that seem morally doubtful, although cursing a violator of monastic
property rights might have appeared less problematic to a medieval monk than it
does to a modern reader.3 But while the necromancer’s formulas do at times
curse the spirits and threaten prospective victims,4 in formal and structural terms
the language of the conjurations does not closely resemble that of the curses
Little discusses. Further, liturgical curses are inherently the communal acts of a
community such as a religious house or cathedral chapter, whereas the
conjurations express the will of a single necromancer. The curses assume direct
divine agency, while the conjurations presuppose the compliance of created
spirits.
The following (from no. 3) may be taken as a representative conjuration:
[Declaration:] I conjure [Address:] you demons inscribed in this circle, to
whom is given the power of seducing and binding women in the love of men,
[Invocations:]
•   by the virtue and power of the divine majesty,
•   and by the thrones and dominations and powers and principalities of Him who spoke and they


--- PAGE 157 ---
were made,
•   and by those [angels] who do not cease to cry out with one voice, saying, ‘Holy, holy, holy, Lord
God of Sabaoth, heaven and earth are full of your glory. Hosanna in the highest. Blessed is he who
comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest,’
•   and by these names, which cause you fear and terror: Rator, Lampoy, Despan, Brulo, Dronoth,
Maloqui, Satola, Gelbid, Mascifin, Nartim and Lodoni,
•   and by this ring which is here,
•   and by the innumerable powers that you and your superiors possess,
[Instruction:] that wherever you are, you should rise up from your places
without delay and go to so-and-so, and immediately without deception lead
her here, and take her back when I wish. And let no one be aware of this or
take account of it.
More complex in its structure is this conjuration (from no. 7):
[Address:] O Vsyr, Salaul, Silitor, Demor, Zanno, Syrtroy, Risbel, Cutroy,
Lytay, Onor, Moloy, Pumotor, Tami, Oor and Ym, arms-bearing spirits,
whose role it is to bear arms and to deceive human senses wherever you wish,
[Declaration:] I, so-and-so, conjure and exorcize and invoke you,
[Invocations:]
•   by the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, who are called the holy Trinity,
•   and by the creator of heaven and earth and of all things, visible and invisible,
•   and by him who formed man from the mud of the earth,
•   and by the annunciation of our Lord Jesus Christ,
•   and by his nativity,
•   and by his death and passion,
•   and by his resurrection
•   and by his ascension.
Likewise, [Declaration:] I conjure [Address:] all you aforesaid demons
[Invocations:]
•   by the gracious and most merciful and undefiled and incorrupt virgin Mary, the mother of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who underwent death for us miserable sinners and recalled us to the heavenly
fatherland.
Likewise, [Declaration:] I conjure [Address:] you aforesaid spirits
[Invocations:]
•   by all the holy men and holy women of God,
•   and by all the apostles, martyrs, confessors, virgins and widows,
•   and by these most precious and ineffable names of the Creator of all, by which you all are
bound, and which arouse fear in all things in heaven, on earth, and in hell, to wit Aa, Ely, Sother,
Adonay, Cel, Sabaoth, Messyas, Alazabra and Osian.
Likewise, [Declaration:] I conjure and exorcize you [Invocations:]
•   by the virtue and power of all your princes, kings, lords, and superiors,
•   and by your virtue and capacity and power,
•   and by your dwelling place, of which this [circle] is the form,


--- PAGE 158 ---
•   and by all the figures present within it,
[Instruction:] that, inseparably bound to my power, you should come to me
without delay, appearing in such a form that you will in no way frighten me,
submissive and prepared to do and manifest to me all that I wish, and that you
should do this by [the power of] all things on heaven and on earth.
To ‘conjure’ or ‘adjure’ someone meant basically to command him or her, and
the terms had broad application. At one point in the Song of Songs the
Bridegroom says, ‘I adjure you, daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes and the
hinds of the fields, not to arouse or awake the beloved.’5 In the Merovingian era,
a Bishop Nicetius wrote in a letter to one Clotsinda, ‘I conjure you, Lady
Clotsinda, by the tremendous Day of Judgement, that you both read this letter
carefully and often try to expound it to your husband.’6 Even in this context,
where the message is clearly political and has nothing to do directly with
incorporeal spirits, the command is supported by appeal to an eschatological
event. In the vita of Saint Brendan, one sea monster says to another, ‘I adjure
you in the name of Saint Bridget … to leave me alone,’ and the efficacy of the
adjuration becomes a sore point in Bridget’s holy rivalry with Brendan, whose
power the monster does not bother to invoke even though he, unlike Bridget, is
physically present.7 In a context closer to that of demonic magic, ghosts too
might be conjured, as becomes manifest from a series of fifteenth-century ghost
stories emanating from a Cistercian house in Yorkshire. The ghosts typically
cause disruption to arouse the attention of the living, but it is only when they
have been conjured or commanded by someone with spiritual power, and in the
name of that which is holy, that they can speak and accomplish the business for
which they have come back to earth. In one case, for example, a spirit who
wished poshumously to confess his sins (allegedly including murder) had to be
conjured by a parish priest ‘in the name of the Holy Trinity and by the power of
Jesus Christ’ to answer all the priest’s questions, whereupon he ‘spoke from his
inmost bowels, not with his tongue, but as if inside an empty barrel’, and
received absolution.8
The conjurations used in late medieval Europe are no different in principle
from those used in other cultures, but the precise forms are in part culturally
specific. In medieval Jewish conjurations, many of which survive from the Cairo
Geniza, God’s authority may be brought to bear on angels or demons to induce
them to do the magician’s bidding. These formulas are similar in their overall
force but different in structure from the conjurations used within Christendom.


--- PAGE 159 ---
Typically they are marked by six elements: first, the spirits are invoked in the
name of God; second, they are adjured to perform specific tasks; third, the client
is identified; fourth, the expected favours are listed; fifth, the requests are
repeated and reinforced with quotations from the Bible and elsewhere, and sixth,
the formulas conclude with a solemn liturgical ‘Amen’ or ‘Selah’.9 The
resemblance to the conjurations of the Christian world is close enough that one
might posit influence of Jewish magic on its Christian equivalent, but not so
close as to prove simple and straightforward borrowing from one tradition to the
other.
The conjurations of the Munich handbook are not always in the same form.
One notable exception is a conjuration given in pseudo-Chaldean (no. 18):
Bismille araathe…. This formula actually derives from an Arabic protoype:
Bismillahi ar-Rahma-n ar-Rahi-m, the opening line of the Quran (‘in the name
of God, the merciful, the beneficent’), is a standard beginning to a Muslim
invocation, and other words in the formula appear also to be garbled versions of
Arabic. Shorter or longer texts of such pseudo-Chaldean appear elsewhere as
well (nos 19, 20 and 21), but in these cases the very esotericism is more
important than any vestigial structure.
Normally the language for conjurations in late medieval Western sources was
Latin, but at times – perhaps most often when a young child was being used as a
medium – the conjuration is translated into the vernacular. The Munich
handbook instructs the master at one point to have the child conjure the spirit in
the mother tongue (no. 27). In the Rawlinson manuscript, the text shifts to the
vernacular particularly for formulas addressed to the spirits when they have
come, in one case for a threat addressed to them if they do not come, and once
for a ‘binding’ conjuration (coniuracio ligacionis); the intent in at least some of
these cases may be that the master’s young companion, who might be a mere
beginner in Latin, should use the vernacular.
The declaration
One of the most widespread ways of distinguishing between magic and religion
is the notion that magic is coercive whereas religion is petitionary. Martin Buber
seems to assume such a contrast when he says that ‘Magic desires to obtain its
effects without entering into relation.’11 Yet this distinction is questionable,
partly because it is not a mode of distinction that would have been familiar to
medieval Europeans, also because it provides little aid in disentangling magical


--- PAGE 160 ---
and religious elements that tend to be inextricably intertwined or even fused. It
seems more useful to view demonic magic as inherently a kind of religious
activity, and natural magic as lending itself readily to the intermingling of
devotional elements.12 It is the case, however, that the necromancers typically
saw themselves as commanding, constraining and binding the spirits they
invoked, and one of the arguments most insistently made in the theological
condemnations of magic in the late Middle Ages is that such constraint is in fact
not possible.13 The magicians’ conception of what they were doing is signalled
already in the very opening of a formula of conjuration: the declaration is a
statement of intent, indicating how the conjurer perceived his relationship with
the spirits. They saw themselves as having a power analogous to that by which
Christ astonished those about him (Mk 1:27, Lk 4:36), that of commanding
unclean spirits and compelling their obedience.
At times the declaration is simple and unrepeated: ‘I conjure you’ (coniuro
vos or coniuro te) is by far the most common declaration, occurring fully 147
times in the Munich handbook; equivalent formulas, such as ‘I order you’, ‘I
adjure you’, ‘I exorcize you’ and ‘I invoke you’, are also common.14 Elsewhere
the declaration is compound: ‘I invoke and adjure you’ or ‘I conjure you and
command you’.15 In longer conjurations, the declaration may be repeated
intermittently as a way of breaking the litany of invocations: ‘I conjure you’ is in
six conjurations repeated once or twice, but may occur as often as five or even
eleven times.16 Elsewhere the recurring declarations vary in their form:
I conjure … I conjure you … I conjure you and exorcize you [and] command
you …
I conjure you … I conjure you and call you to witness … I adjure you
[followed by eight more occurrences of ‘I conjure you’].
At times the recurrence and compounding of declarations becomes forceful and
dramatic:
I conjure you and exorcize you and call you forth … I conjure you … I
conjure you and order and command you … I call you forth …
I invoke you powerfully … I invoke and conjure you powerfully and exorcise
you … I invoke and conjure and exorcize and constrain you …


--- PAGE 161 ---
we exorcize and command you … we exorcize and manfully command you.
I invoke you on behalf of [ex parte] the Father, I provoke you on behalf of the
Son, I invoke you on behalf of the Holy Spirit17
Approximately 43 per cent of the time the second and following declarations are
preceded by ‘likewise’ (item), which reinforces the sense and the force of the
serial construction.
But while the declarations are most often statements of command, not
infrequently they express supplication: ‘I supplicate you’; ‘I beseech you’; ‘I
beseech you, I supplicate you, I request of you’; ‘I pray you’; ‘I pray, ask, and
entreat’.18 Alternatively, the declaration may be one not of command alone but
also of constraint (‘I invoke, conjure, and constrain you’), a claim to yet higher
power over the spirits.19 A command may in principle be refused; coercion may
not. As with humans, however, so too with demons, the distinction becomes
blurred: a command supported by sufficient authority, or coupled with
compelling threats, may be as compelling psychologically as brute force is
physically.
The address
If the declaration is the conjurer’s statement of intent, indicating how he
perceives his action vis-à-vis the spirits, the address is the element in the
conjuration that shows which spirits were being called upon – not an
insignificant matter, either from the magicians’ perspective or from the
viewpoint of authorities investigating the practice of magic. The address is our
chief source of information for the demonology and angelology of the
magicians. This topic will be explored more fully in the next chapter, but may be
touched upon here. The address is sometimes an apostrophe, in the vocative case
(‘I conjure you, O Brimer, Suburith, Tranayrt, Lyroth, Berien, Damay’), and
sometimes an appositive phrase, in the accusative case (‘I conjure all you
demons inscribed on this ring’).20 While the spirits are commonly both named
and characterized, the name and the description do not always occur in the same
part of the conjuration. And the conjuration mentioned above refers first to ‘all
you demons inscribed on this ring’ and then addresses them twice by name.
When the declaration is repeated, the address is sometimes replicated exactly as
it was first given, but frequently the later declarations addresses merely the
‘aforesaid demons’ (prenominatos demones), as often as ten or eleven times in a


--- PAGE 162 ---
single conjuration.21 When multiple demons are being conjured they are usually
all named, but one conjuration addresses the demon Lylet along with her
companions (socii), who remain unnamed.22
In divinatory experiments, not only the informing spirits but also the boy
serving as the necromancer’s medium are often conjured to tell the truth. In such
cases the conjuration is addressed to the boy simply as puer (no. 22) or, more
often, as ‘young virgin’ or ‘virginal youth’ (virgo iuuenis).23 Less often, objects
used in the experiments are at times conjured and thus addressed: an image or a
cloak. Power-bearing names are also addressed (‘O ye most holy names’).24 Two
experiments have conjurations addressed to the spirit who has taken the form of
a horse.25 In most contexts, the beings whose support is most needed and whose
resistance is most feared are the spirits, and they are thus the ones chiefly subject
to the magician’s conjuration.
The invocations
As the fundamental source of efficacy by which a conjuration works, the
invocations call upon the sacred power of numinous beings, names and events,
power that can be wielded against the addressees and can make them to carry out
the master’s will. For example, a conjuration in one experiment (no. 7) invokes
the power of God; events in the life of Christ; various sacred personages (Mary,
the saints, then specifically the apostles, martyrs, confessors, virgins, and
widows); the sacred names of God (which bring great fear to ‘all things in
heaven, on earth, and in hell’); the power of the demons’ own princes, kings,
lords, and superiors; the spirits’ own powers; their habitation, of which the circle
is a representation, and ‘all the figures present within it’, although in fact there
are no figures thus depicted. The invocations are strung together in a manner
reminiscent of a litany, in most cases between two and eight in a single
conjuration, but not uncommonly as many as twenty-four. Only four
experiments, all divinatory and involving the cooperation of a child medium,
have conjurations with more than twenty-four invocations, and one of these runs
to fully fifty-eight.26
Invocations can be found in mainstream Christian prayers from the late
Middle Ages as well as in conjurations. The Obsecro te found in the Little Office
of the Blessed Virgin, invoked Mary by the joy she experienced at 