SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 20/39  |  CHARS: 451917-476917 of 911762
============================================================

 rogito); no. 22 (te
deprecor); no. 23 (te exoramus); no. 24 (rogo … rogo vos); no. 29 (te deprecor); no. 41 (precor te … vocor
et contestor and precor, rogo, et peto).
19 E.g., no. 6 (rogo vos, coniuro et adiuro). no. 15 uses the forms coniuro et constringo te; te invoco,
coniuro, et constringo, and te invoco et coniuro et constringo.
20 Both from no. 10; the latter reads Coniuro vos, omnes demones scriptos in hoc anulo.
21 No. 39 and no. 40.
22 No. 23.
23 In no. 27 he is addressed several times by that designation and also as simply virgo or infans.
24 Nos 4 (ymago), 11 (cappa), 24 (O vos sanctissima nomina). no. 40 addresses Jaspar, Balthasar,
Melchior, Smoagel, Emanuel, et deus fortis, but this appears to be a mistake; these names should appear in
invocations rather than in an address.
25 Addressed as eque bone in nos 17 and 43.
26 A conjuration in experiment no. 38 has thirty-four, one in no. 40 has forty-six, one in no. 33 has
forty-nine, and one in no. 39 has fifty-eight.
27 Eamon Duffy, The Stripping of the Altars: Traditional Religion in England, c. 1400–c. 1580 (New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1992), 262f.
28 Cf. The Commonplace Book of Robert Reynes of Acle: An Edition of Tanner MS 407, ed. Cameron
Louis (New York: Garland, 1980), 169–70.


--- PAGE 181 ---
29 Nos 1, 10, 13, 14 (where it is called the nomen altissimum), 25, 27, 28, 33 (where it is said to have
been used by Abraham) and 35. On the Jewish background for magical use of the divine name see K.
Kohler, ‘The Tetragrammaton (Shem ham-M’forash) and its uses’, Journal of Jewish Lore and Philosophy,
1 (1919), 19–32.
30 Compare the wording of the conjuration in Bodleian Library MS Rawlinson D 252, fols 87v–89v.
31 Nos 33 (AGLA); 39 (Theos); 28 (Yschiros); 28 and 33 (Athanatos); 28 (Eleyson); 14, 23, 27, 28, 33
(On); 25 (Hon); 28, 33 (Pancraton); 39 (Panthocrathon). One of the more extraordinary invocations is per
legem legalem et per spem sperantem et per karitatem karitatiuam (no. 14), presumably an adaptation or
garbling of the three theological virtues.
32 Joseph Kaster, trans. and ed., The Wings of the Falcon (New York, 1968), 60.
33 On the lore of Virgil see Domenico Comparetti, Vergil in the Middle Ages, trans. E.F.M. Benecke
(London: Swan Sonnenschein, 1895), and J.W. Spargo, Virgil the Necromancer (Cambridge, MA, 1934).
34 See esp. F.C. Conybeare, ‘The Testament of Solomon’, Jewish Quarterly Review, 11 (1899), 1–45,
but also John M. Hull, Hellenistic Magic and the Synoptic Tradition (Naperville, IL: Allenson, 1974), 30–
35.
35 E.g., no. 20.
36 Fols 141r–141v.
37 Rawl. MS D 252, fols 16v–17v., 72r–72v.
38 E.g., nos 27, 35, 40.
39 No. 25, vt non recedatis … quousque certificati fuerimus de omni re dubitabili; no. 27, vt non
habeatis licenciam recedendi … donec … michi dicatis … veritatem, and vt non habeatis potestatem
recedendi … donec … meam voluntatem adimpleueritis, and vt virtutem talem recipias quod quocumque
fueris ligata, ipsi spiritus non habeant potestatem recedendi quousque velle ligatoris perficiant). They may
also be used to ensure that the spirits will repeat the desired effect on later occasions, at the master’s will
(no. 9, vt iurare vos debeatis vt predictum equum semper ad me venire cogetis). The term ‘bond’ (hoc
vinculum est legendum) occurs in no. 33.
40 E.g., Rawlinson D 252, 4v, 43v (coniuracio obediencialis) and 12r, 14v, and 36v (coniuracio
licencialis).
41 Nos 1, 6, 8, and 9. Also nos 7 and 9, quatenus … ad me venire debeatis, and vt hic venire debeatis;
and no. 11, quatenus … huc venire debeatis.
42 Nos 1, 6, and 13. Also no. 24, vt mittatis … angelos … qui dicant michi veritatem; no. 27, vt … vadas
pro rege tuo et facias eum venire; no. 38, vt vestrum vnus … veniat vt iste puer possit eum … videre; no. 41,
vt michi spiritum veritatis … mittere digneris.
43 Nos 5, 13, and 35. Also no. 2, vt eatis … et relinquatis talem in statu priori, and vt … [talem]
personam … circuatis, et sensus eius … affligatis; no. 4, vt … ipsum [?] iuxta me taliter aligetis, vt me …
veneretur; and no. 5, quatenus … odium … inseratis.
44 Nos 22, 24, 27, and 38. Also no. 38, vt michi sitis obedientes et isto puero … quod verum est …
dicatis, and no. 39, quod … ostendatis et dicetis huic puero … vbi acceptum uel reconditum sit hoc furtum.
45 No. 22, quatenus isti puero tribuas scienciam et intellectum, vt michi veritatem annunciet; no. 29,
illumina istius pueri cor [et] mentem, et fac vt michi veritatem … dicat … vt [?] indicet omnia, and vt isti
puero tribuas scienciam et intellectum, vt michi veritatem … dicat; no. 38, vt … iste puer … possit videre
furem cum furto; no. 39, quod vobis detis auctoritatem huic puero … audiendi, interrogandi, et videndi, and
vt … vngwem huius pueri … crescere et clarescere faciatis … vt apparere possit … et videre in eo furem et
furtum; no. 40, vt … faciatis vngwem istius pueri … crescere et clarescere … quod iste puer … in eo videre
possit furem uel fures et furtum.


--- PAGE 182 ---
46 No. 27.
47 Nos 33, 3, 43, 15, 39, 40.
48 No. 27; cf. no. 22.
49 Nos 23, 27, 28, 29, 33.
50. Nos 10, 15, 10, 39.
51 Nos 14, 15, 17, and 43.
52 The conjuration on fols 59v–69v is abbreviated; the full text is given on fols 109r–118r and 139r–
146r. Compare the conjuration in Bodleian Library MS Rawlinson D 252, fols 24r–29r.
53 For parallels see Marvin Meyer and Richard Smith, eds, Ancient Christian Magic: Coptic Texts of
Ritual Power (1994), 157, and Kaster, Wings of the Falcon, 151–2. See also Malleus maleficarum, ii.1.13,
p. 141.
54 Fols 115v and 144r, Alioquin exorcizo te ut cathene penales tue fecundantur [or, on 144r, perhaps
secundantur] sulphure et pice.
55 Fols 111v–118r and 141r–146r.
56 Adolf Franz, Die kirchlichen Benediktionen im Mittelalter, 2 (Freiburg im Breisgau, 1909), 587–96.
57 Coniuratio malignorum spirituum in corporibus hominum existentium prout in Sancto Petro (Rome:
Stephan Plannck, ca. 1492; also Rome: Eucharius Silber, ca. 1495, and other editions).
58 Clm 849, fols 109r–109v, 139v.
59 British Library, MS Sloane 962, fols 9v–10r: In nomine patris, et filii, et spiritus sancti, amen.
Coniuro uos elues et omnia genera demonum nocturna siue diuturna per patrem, et filium, et spiritum
sanctum, atque indiuiduam trinitatem, et per intercessionem beatissime et gloriose semperque virginis
Marie, per oraciones prophetarum, per merita patriarcharum, per suffragia angelorum et archangelorum,
per int[er?]uentum apostolorum, per passionem martyrum, per fidem confessorum, per castitatem virginum,
et per intercessionem omnium sanctorum, et per septem dormientes, hos quorum nomina sunt hec: Malchus,
Maximianus, Dionisius, Iohennes, Constantinus, Seraphion, Martimanus, et per nomen domini dei quod est
benedictum in secula  A  G  L 
 A 
 vt non noceatis neque aliquid mali faciatis vel inferatis huic
famulo dei N. neque dormiendo neque vigilando. 
 Christus uicit [sic] 
 Christus regnat 
 Christus
imperat 
 Christus nos benedicat 
 [et] ab omni malo deffendat 
 Amen. In nomine patris, et filii, et
spiritus sancti, amen. 
 In nomine meo demonia eicient, linguis loquentur nouis, serpentes tollent, et si
mortiferum quid biberint non eis nocebit, super egros manos imponent et bene habebunt. 
 Crux
admirabilis, euacuacio doloris, restitucio sanitatis.  Ecce crucem domini, fugite partes [sic?] adverse. 
Vicit leo de tribu iuda, radix Dauid [Apoc 5:5] allam [sic?].  Christus vincit  Christus regnat  Christus
imperat  Christus hunc famulum dei N. ab omni fantasia et ab omni vexacione diaboli et ab omni malo
omni hora et vbique per virtutem sancte crucis deffendat 
 Amen 
 agios 
 hyskyros 
 athanathos 
eleyson .
60 Fol. 10r: Contra malignos spiritus. Audi maledicte Sathana, adiuro te per nomen eterni dei et
saluatoris nostri filij eius Ihesu Christi, cum tua victus inuidia, tremens gemensque, discede. Nichil tibi
neque angelis tuis sit commune cum famulo dei N., neque noceas ei, neque appareas coram illo visibiliter,
sompniendo neque vigilando, et iterum coniuro vos demones siue spiritus malignos, quicumque sitis, per
aspercionem sanguinis Ihesu Christi in cruce, et eius vulnera cruentata. Et iterum coniuro vos per mortem
Ihesu Christi in cruce et spiritus emissionem, qui ad infernum descendit et ilum spoliauit, vt nunc et a modo
semper fugiatis ab hoc famulo dei N. et nunquam in eum introeatis sed exeatis et recedatis ab eo. Et iterum
coniuro vos per virtutem verborum istorum infrascriptorum hic [MS hoc?], si infra eum sis vel sitis, vt
exeas vel exeatis, si plures sitis, ab illo vt nullum a modo habeat terrorem neque vexacionem. Hoc vos
cogat, verbum caro factum  crux Christi sancta [MS sancea or santea], claui, corona spinea in sanguine
agni dei in cruce perfusa, saluent ei, deffendant hic et vbique ferentem [sic] ista ab omni aduersitate diaboli


--- PAGE 183 ---
et peruersa. In nomine patris, etc.
61 Franz, Die kirchlichen Benediktionen, 2, p. 573.
62 Gene A. Brucker, ed., The Society of Renaissance Florence: A Documentary Study (New York:
Harper & Row, 1971), 261–6; Gene A. Brucker, ‘Sorcery in early Renaissance Florence’, Studies in the
Renaissance, 10 (1963), 13–16, 22f.
63 André Goddu, ‘The failure of exorcism in the Middle Ages’, in A. Zimmermann, ed., Soziale
Ordnungen im Selbstverständnis des Mittelalters (Berlin, 1980), 540–57.
64 Nancy Caciola, ‘Discerning Spirits: Sanctity and Possession in the Later Middle Ages’ (University of
Michigan dissertation, 1994), Ch. V: ‘Exorcism from spectacle to ritual’.


--- PAGE 184 ---
I
7
Demons and Daimons:
The Spirits Conjured
n his recent study of late Byzantine demonology, Richard Greenfield
distinguishes between a ‘standard orthodox’ tradition of demonology and
‘alternative’ traditions. The former sees demons as immaterial, as ranked
under a single chief (Satan, the Devil), and as acting only with God’s permission
or through illusion (which they use because, weakened by Christ, they must dupe
humans into believing they still wield power). The latter ascribe some degree of
materiality to them, classify them in various hierarchies with multiple leaders,
and ascribe some power to the demons themselves.1 Greenfield says that in the
alternative traditions, ‘it is always assumed that the demons are free to obey the
practitioner or are capable of doing what he wants as long as sufficient or
coercion is provided. There is no suggestion that they can only do so if allowed
to by God for the ends of divine providence or economy, the state of affairs
required by standard belief – indeed, many of the purposes for which they are
employed would seem to be most inappropriate, if not actually contradictory to
normal Christian concepts of God’s purposes.’2 Greenfield does not mean to
suggest a clear or sharp dichotomy, but rather a strong difference in tendency
between the theological purists and those with alternative and at least implicitly
non-orthodox views.
With perhaps some differences in nuance, one can make the same rough
distinction for the later medieval West as well, and some if not all of the specific
contrasts that Greenfield isolates would apply in the West. Most fundamentally,
one can discern – in the Munich manuscript, as in Western magic generally – a
tension between the early Christian notion of demons as fallen angels, whose
status is determined by their free moral act of rebellion against God, and the
Graeco-Roman conception of daimones (or daemones in Latin) as spirits linked
with the world of nature, whose status is fixed by their natural position within
the hierarchy of beings. Apuleius’s De deo Socratis remained long influential in
Christian tradition, despite its incongruence with the notion of demons as fallen


--- PAGE 185 ---
angels; for Apuleius, daemones were rational beings whose natural sphere was
the sublunary air, just as gods and humans are rational beings residing in the
ether and on earth respectively. They are not naturally evil, but may be either
good or evil.3 The conjurations of late medieval necromancers, resembling as
they do the exorcisms intended for the possessed, presuppose that the spirits in
question are the same sort of fallen ones that Christ expelled from the
energumens of first-century Palestine. But intermingled with references to such
manifestly maleficent beings are notions of benign or neutral spirits, neither
angels nor demons in classical Christian terms, a category not recognized in the
orthodox theology of the late Middle Ages.4 One might thus say that the
conjurations betray a tension between ‘demonology’ and what we might call
‘daimonology’.
Theologians as well as necromancers believed that the demons held various
ranks, in a kind of hierarchy that parodied that of God’s heavenly court, or rather
a ‘Lowerarchy’, as C.S. Lewis called it.5 The notion of a demonic hierarchy, with
a multiplicity of named and ranked spirits, stems chiefly from the Neoplatonists,
and above all Iamblichus. Proclus, drawing on Iamblichus’s elaborate
categorization, spoke of daimones as ruling the fire, the air, the water, the earth
and the underground region; to this system Psellus added lucifugues (or light-
fleeing) demons, and Johannes Trithemius lent the weight of his authority to this
system.6 The basic notion became part of mainstream theological tradition: that
demons are organized into an infernal parody of the celestial hierarchy is an
assumption that the Malleus maleficarum shared with Thomas Aquinas.7 For the
later medieval West, at least, one thus cannot speak of such conceptions as part
of an alternative tradition, although it is true that a fascination with the details of
the infernal hierarchy was left to the fringes of the theological community.
Altogether 189 spirits are addressed by name in the Munich handbook’s
conjurations, of whom 88 are referred to expressly as demones. Further
specification is common: ‘malign demons’; ‘most inimical spirits’; ‘all hateful
and malign, invidious and discordant demons’; ‘arms-bearing [or squire] spirits,
whose role it is to bear arms and … deceive human senses’; ‘spirits who dwell in
the water [and] endanger ships’; ‘spirits who attend to sinners’; ‘infernal spirits’;
‘fornicator, tempter, seducer, possessor of humans’.8 In short, the compiler of
this manual was far from squeamish about invoking clearly and explicitly fallen
angels.
The conjurations of the Munich handbook sometimes refer to demons by their
rank in the infernal hierarchy: five are ‘princes of the demons’; three are


--- PAGE 186 ---
powerful, magnificent, and illustrious spirits; Bartha is a king; Baltim, Galtim,
and Saltim are dukes; Belial is ‘foremost prince’; seven demons are ‘subjects’ of
Lytim.9 On rare occasion the spirits referred to in the Munich handbook are
clearly conceived as unfallen – a claim that would elicit skepticism from
orthodox authorities. Experiments no. 24 and no. 25 both refer to ‘angels’, and in
other cases as well the characterizations could be taken as implying unfallen
angels: ‘most benign spirits, who sow concord’; ‘most pleasant, happy, joyful
spirits’; ‘powerful, magnificent, and illustrious spirits, in whom I place full
trust’.10 In two experiments the spirit addressed is named Orient, and in both
cases he is explicitly conceived as a benevolent figure: he is addressed, ‘O most
high and benign king Orient’, ‘O benign Orient, maker of the greater part of the
world, heaven, and earth, at whose command all things on heaven and on earth
were wisely made’.11 It would be hazardous to posit a direct connection here
with the goddess-figure Oriente said to have been venerated in the territory of
Milan in the late fourteenth century,12 but in both cases the traditional medieval
primacy of the direction east obviously lies behind the construction of a chief
deity. In several experiments God himself is addressed: ‘God, creator of all
things’; ‘Almighty, everlasting God, Lord Jesus Christ’; ‘God of heaven, God of
earth, God of the angels, God of the archangels, you who are king of all the
saints, the patriarchs, and the prophets’; ‘Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living
God, who, according to the will of the Father, with the cooperation of the Holy
Spirit, by your death gave life to the world’; and ‘King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, eternal and unchanging Lord God’.13
Sometimes the nature of the spirit addressed cannot be determined. In one
case the subject of the address is the indeterminate ‘N.’ (no. 12), and elsewhere
the spirit who appears to a boy is addressed simply as ‘you who are before me’
(no. 27). Another experiment provides a conjuration with the indeterminate
address, ‘O so-and-so, of thus-and-such an order’ (no. 1).
A few of the experiments list demons whose names are familiar from other
sources: Astaroth, Baruch, Belial, Belzebub, Berith, Castiel, Lucifer, Mirael,
Paymon and Satan or Sathan.14 The experiments that list such familiar spirits do
not restrict themselves to these, however, but also address less familiar or
entirely unfamiliar names: one conjures not only Belzebub, Berith, Lucifer and
Sathan, but also Apolin, Beliath and Maraloch; another addresses not only
Mirael and Astaroth but also Belferith, Camoy, Noryoth, Ocel, Oreoth, Pinen,
Sismael, Sobronoy and Tryboy; a third gives the altogether well established
name Satan (spelled ‘Sathan’) but also the exceptional ones Altramat,


--- PAGE 187 ---
Archidemath, Discobermath, Fritath, Hegergibet, Helyberp, Pestiferat and Sona;
a fourth lists not only Berith, Belzebub and Astaroth, but also Althes, Cormes,
Dies, Diles, Dilia, Fabar, Felsmes, Mithiomo, Molbet, Natheus, Onaris, Pist,
Progemon, Thobar, Vmon and Vralchim.15 In some cases the names listed could
be corrupt or variant forms of more familiar ones: Apolin could be Apollion,
Arath could be Arathiel, Astra could be Astrael, Damay could be Dahnay, Erlain
could be Erel(l)im, Gana could be Ganael, Gebel could be Gebiel, Lamair could
be Lama, Oor could be Or, Safrit could be Safriel, Tami could be Tamiel, Taraor
could be Tara, Tatomofon could be Tatonon, Thomo could be Thomax, Ym
could be Im, and Zanno or Zaimo could be Zainon.16 Even so, of the 189 names
addressed in the conjurations, only 17 per cent at most seem to be well
established ones. Of the eleven spirits named in experiment no. 34, only Curson
has broad currency (unless Hanni is equated with Haniel). When the list of
spirits in this manual is compared with that in Picatrix, what is striking is the
singular lack of correspondence.
The crucial question for the necromancers of Western Europe is whether the
demons can be compelled to appear, and their own assumption – that the demons
can be so compelled, but only with God’s permission and aid – is not
fundamentally different from the assumption that underlies orthodox exorcism
and mainstream theology. John of Frankfurt devoted a treatise in 1412 to the
question, ‘whether it is possible to have the power of coercing a demon through
characters, figures, and recitation of words’ (utrum potestas cohercendi demonis
fieri possit per caracteres, figuras atque verborum prolationes), and he insisted
that it was not – that the demons may pretend to be compelled only to lure the
conjurers deeper into their own perfidy, but that they come, if at all, of their own
free will.17 He seems not to have taken fully into account that the necromancers,
exactly like orthodox exorcists, claimed the power of coercing demons
specifically with divine aid. To be sure, their goals were at variance with
orthodox morality, yet they saw their appeal to sacred powers as itself a sacred
activity, and if it led to the killing and coercion of other individuals, that did not
sway them from this conviction.18 In any event, while their critics and judges
saw the necromancers as in league with the demons, they perceived themselves
as calling upon God to help them control and exploit the spirits.
One reason it appeared to critics that the necromancers were bound to the
spirits they conjured, rather than vice versa, is that they seemed to make sacrifice
to these spirits: fumigations and other acts could readily be seen as sacrifices.
Nicholas Eymericus explains that some conjurers exhibit the honour of latria to


--- PAGE 188 ---
the demons they invoke by sacrificing to them, adoring them, reciting execrable
prayers to them, dedicating themselves and promising obedience to the demons,
swearing by them and adjuring one demon by the name of a higher one, singing
songs in their honour, genuflecting and making prostrations, observing chastity
out of respect for them, fasting and otherwise macerating the flesh in their
honour, wearing black or white out of reverence to them, using characters and
unknown names, lighting lamps and offering fumigations, sacrificing birds and
beasts and even their own blood, and so forth.19
Some of the experiments in the Munich handbook and elsewhere do indeed
involve offering something, such as a hoopoe, to the demons. Whether such
offerings count as sacrificial depends on one’s definition of sacrifice. If any
exchange with spirits implying do ut des is a sacrifice, then the term applies.
From the necromancers’ perspective, however, a fumigation would surely be
more a means for alluring and gaining power over the spirits, and the offering of
a hoopoe would be payment for services rendered. There is no explicit
acknowledgement in the handbook that the magician is serving the spirits; to the
contrary, he sees himself as commanding and exploiting them.
The spirits invoked may on occasion be represented as unfallen ones. Some
are referred to as ‘most benign’, which could suggest but does not prove that
they are unfallen; even an evil spirit may relate in a kindly manner toward his
own. In one experiment (no. 9) the master greets the spirits when they appear
with a wish that God may restore them to their original status, which makes it
clear that they are fallen yet suggests that they are none the less redeemable.20
Most interesting is the suggestion that the spirits who provide a magic ship (no.
8) are of intermediate status: ‘And you should note carefully that in this ship you
are able to mention holy things, as in true Christianity, because these spirits are
between good and evil, dwelling neither in Hell nor in Paradise.’ The Paris
theologians in 1398 condemned the belief that there are good and benign
demons, omniscient demons, and demons who are neither saved nor damned but
somewhere in between.21 At times the spirits summoned are threatened with
damnation if they refuse to obey the master, which assumes either that they are
unfallen spirits or that they occupy some middle ground, perhaps being fallen
but capable of redemption.22
The problem of distinguishing between fallen and unfallen spirits had long
been a vexed one, and it was not made easier by the necromancers’ habit of
calling more or less indiscriminately on spirits of both kinds, as well as allegedly
neutral spirits. The Rawlinson necromantic manuscript, for example, sometimes


--- PAGE 189 ---
prays for power over all malign spirits, or for power over Satan, or for protection
from malign spirits. It explicitly invokes Satan and other ‘infernal demons’.23 At
other times it implicitly identifies the invoked spirits as demons, conjuring them
‘by the power by which [Christ] destroyed hell and despoiled and tormented
your companions [socios]’ or ‘by him who cast you from heaven’. While
magicians were not at all shy about conjuring angels directly, the tendency in the
Rawlinson manuscript perhaps more often than in other manuscripts is to pray
that good angels be sent. It even includes a lengthy prayer to the master’s
guardian angel for protection. At one juncture it conjures ‘benevolent spirits and
demons’, without making altogether clear whether these are distinct categories.24
One rule of thumb was that spirits explicitly known from traditional sources
as unfallen angels could be prayed to, but others were at best suspect. The
archangels mentioned in the Bible and the Old Testament apocrypha (Gabriel,
Michael, Raphael) were mentioned from the seventh century onward in the
Litany of the Saints, although it was not until the twentieth century that Benedict
XV made the feast of the last two obligatory. The names of other angels were
deemed apocryphal: the Book of Enoch adds Uriel, Raguel, Seraqael and Haniel
to the list of archangels. In the mid-eighth century a Frankish priest named
Adalbert was condemned, inter alia, for praying to Uriel, Raguel, Tubuel, Adin,
Tubuas, Sabaok and Samiel, all of whom a Roman synod declared to be in fact
demons. In 789, Charlemagne’s Admonitio generalis condemned the invocation
of ‘unknown angels’, presumably for the same reason.25 Even if a petitioner
intended to call upon unfallen angels, the spirits he summoned might not be the
spirits he got.
Johann von Frankfurt noted in the early fifteenth century that Plato
distinguished between good daimons (calodemones) and evil (cacodemones), but
for scriptural and do