SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 6/39  |  CHARS: 116154-141154 of 911762
============================================================

hat this collection is his
and represents an early phase in his own development. To judge by the book’s
Latinity, I incline toward the hypothesis that what we have here is the work of a
man with some but not a great deal of learning, who would have tended more
toward the fringes of society than toward court, even if he had aspirations for
higher status that found expression in the early sections of his book but waned
over the time he worked on it.
Table B. Types of necromancy found in Clm 849


--- PAGE 55 ---
While recognizing that this reconstruction is and must be conjectural, I
suggest, then, that the compiler of this miscellany was a moderately educated
member of the lower or middling clergy who began by writing colourful and
imaginative experiments in hopes of establishing a reputation for expertise in the
occult, and perhaps a foothold at some court, possibly that of the Duke of
Bavaria in Munich, but whose aspirations were thwarted, and who eventually
turned his attention to forms of magic that were less fanciful, playful and
fantastic, but more in demand for practical application and thus more lucrative,
and in any case still revealing of the diversities of magic in late medieval culture.
Table B summarizes the characterization already given of the three types of
necromantic experiment found in Clm 849 and anticipates further discussion (in
the next three chapters) of these categories. As should be obvious, it consists of
broad generalizations, which require some qualification and nuance when
applied to particular concrete experiments. While I have decided to use this chart
in the interest of clarifying the patterns, the distinctions, and the correlations I
mean to emphasize, I am aware of the hazards of fixing these categories too
sharply and making them rigid when they should remain fluid. In highlighting
the affinity of the psychological experiments with those of Arabic astral magic,
for example, and the divinatory ones with practices well known in Judaism, I by
no means wish to suggest that the techniques in question were exclusively or
even specifically Arabic on the one hand, Jewish on the other. The world of
magic is clearly more complex than that, and the boundaries between Jewish and
Muslim magic too difficult to define. Still, in some ways the heart of this study –
at least its attempt to distinguish different elements in the necromancers’ own
perception of their art – is sketched on this chart in schematic form. I do not
adhere strictly in subsequent discussion to the organizing principles that might
be suggested by the table, but everything laid out here is covered at some point
either above or in following chapters.
Notes
1 Bernard Cerquiglini, Éloge de la variante: histoire critique de la philologie (Paris: Seuil, 1989). See
also Stephen G. Nichols, ‘Introduction: philology in a manuscript culture’, Speculum, 65, no. 1 (Jan. 1990),
1–10; Siegfried Wenzel, ‘Reflections on (new) philology’, ibid., 11–18; and the other articles in that issue of
the journal.
2 Picatrix: The Latin Version of the Ghāyat Al-Hakı-m, ed. David Pingree (London: Warburg Institute,
1986).
3 See, among recent works, Jean Clam, ‘Philosophisches zu Picatrix: Gelehrte Magie und


--- PAGE 56 ---
Anthropologie bei einem arabischen Hermetiker des Mittelalters’, in Albert Zimmermann and Andreas
Speer, eds, Mensch und Natur im Mittelalter, 1 (Berlin and New York: de Gruyter, 1991), 481–509, and
Toufic Fahd, ‘Sciences naturelles et magie dans Gayat al-Hakim du Pseudo-Mayriti’, in E. García Sánchez,
ed., Ciencias de la naturaleza en al-Andalus, 1 (Granada: Conseja Superior de Investigaciones Científicas,
1990), 11–21.
4 Hans Dieter Betz, ed., The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation, Including the Demotic Spells, 1
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986). On the cultural significance of miscellanies see Stephen G.
Nichols and Siegfried Wenzel, eds., The Whole Book: Cultural Perspectives on the Medieval Miscellany
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996).
5 Roger Bacon, De Nigromancia, ed. and trans. Michael-Albion Macdonald (Gillette, NJ: Heptangle,
1988).
6 W. Braekman, ‘Magische experimenten en toverpraktijken uit een middelnederlands handschrift’,
Verslagen en mededelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamse Academie voor Taal-en Letterkunde, 1966, pp. 53–
118; also published separately (Ghent: Seminarie voor Volkskunde, 1966).
7 Fol. 134r: ‘et postea dicatur in auriola pueri ista oracio: “O dio fare dispiriti spiritale cum lamina
bocha te voio pre [deleted?] pregare che spiriti a questo puto vergeno in questa angestara diby mandare
che diga emonstre lauerita de quelo chio voio domandare”.’
8 Catalogus codicum Latinorum Bibliothecae Regiae Monacensis, 2nd edn, vol. 1, pt 1 (Munich:
Bibliotheca Regia, 1892), 202 (Liber incantationum, exorcismorum et fascinationum variarum).
9 Lynn Thorndike, The History of Magic and Experimental Science (New York: Macmillan and
Columbia University Press, 1923–58).
10 Lynn Thorndike, ‘Imagination and magic: force of imagination on the human body and of magic on
the human mind’, in Mélanges Eugène Tisserant, 7 (Vatican City: Biblioteca Vaticana, 1964), 353–58.
11 Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages, esp. 6–8.
12 I have this information from Frank Klaassen, who is studying manuscripts of ritual magic in English
collections.
13 E.M. Butler, Ritual Magic (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1949), 62.
14 See the codicological analysis of the manuscript given in the final chapter.
15 See n. 7 above.
16 It is worth noting that Thorndike, ‘Imagination and magic’, evidently did not recognize the handbook
as an example of anything else he had seen.
17 Hansen, Quellen, 539–44. On the witch trials in this region and their context see now Pierette Paravy,
De la chrétienté romaine à la Réforme en Dauphiné: evêques, fidèles et déviants (vers 1340–vers 1530)
(Rome: Ecole française de Rome, 1993), and for this case in particular pp. 814–16.
18 Paravy, p. 815 n. 4, suggests that this is a reference to the pilgrimage shrine at Einsiedeln. She also
cites literature on the theme of the diabolical bridge, in particular B.M. Galanti, ‘Le leggenda del “Ponte del
Diavolo” in Italia’, Lares, 18 (1952), 61–73.
19 Johann Hartlieb, Das Buch aller verbotenen Künste, des Aberglaubens und der Zauberei, ed. and
trans. Falk Eisermann and Eckhard Graf (Ahlerstedt: Param, 1989).
20 Frank Fürbeth, Johannes Hartlieb: Untersuchungen zu Leben und Werk (Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1992),
88–132.
21 Hartlieb, ch. 22, pp. 34f.
22 Etymologiae, viii.9, in the Patrologia latina, 82:310–14.
23 Hugh of St Victor, Didascalicon: De studio legendi, vi.15, ed. Charles Henry Buttimer (Washington,
DC: Catholic University of America Press, 1939).


--- PAGE 57 ---
24 Chs 22, 28.
25 Chs 22–24.
26 Chs 33–34.
27 E.g., ch. 85.
28 Otto Hartig, Die Gründung der Münchener Hofbibliothek durch Albrecht V. und Johann Jakob
Fugger (Abhandlungen der Königlichen Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, philosoph.-philolog.
und hist. Klasse, vol. 28, sect. 3, 1914), gives the history of the library that provided the earliest foundation
for the Bavarian State Library, but does not give the provenance of this manuscript.
29 There are two instances in experiment no. 7, and one in no. 27.
30 See the variation in names in nos 4, 7, 9, 10 and 11.
31 The relationship between demonic and other forms of magic in the Renaissance is a primary theme
of D.P. Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic, from Ficino to Campanella (London: Warburg Institute,
1958). See also Charles Zika, ‘Reuchlin’s De verbo mirifico and the magic debate of the late fifteenth
century’, Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes, 39 (1976), 104–38, esp. 112–14 (see p. 114, n.
30, Tota Magia, quae in usu est apud modernos, et quam merito exterminat ecclesia, nullam habet
firmitatem, nullum fundamentum, nullam veritatem, quia pendet ex manu hostium veritatis, potestatum
harum tenebrarum, quae tenebras falsitatis, male dispositis intellectibus obfundunt).
32 Fols 8r–11v.
33 See no. 32 in the edition, where a conjuration edited from two versions in the later folios is addressed
to a spirit named Mirage, while an alternative form in the main block addresses Satan.
34 The Schriftproben in Fürbeth, Johannes Hartlieb, p. 280, show that Hartlieb’s handwriting is not at
all like that in fols 3–108 of Clm 849; it more closely resembles that of some later folios, but not enough
that any of this material could be assigned to him.
35 Thorndike, Michael Scot, esp. 32–39 and 116–21. See also the interesting article of Helmuth
Grössing and Franz Stuhlhofer, ‘Versuch einer Deutung der Rolle der Astrologie in den persönlichen und
politischen Entscheidungen einiger Habsburger des Spätmittelalters’, Anzeiger der Österreichischen
Akademie der Wissenschaften, Philosophisch-historische Klasse, 117 (1980), 267–83. On court astrology in
England see Hilary M. Carey, Courting Disaster: Astrology at the English Court and University in the Later
Middle Ages (New York: St Martin’s Press, 1992).


--- PAGE 58 ---
T
3
Banquets, Horses and Castles:
Illusionist Experiments
he fifteenth-century writer of the Rawlinson necromantic manuscript tells
how to summon a demon in the form of a horse by using conjurations, a
ring with the Tetragrammaton inscribed on it, and a diagram made with the
blood of a hoopoe or a bat. The magician must stand in a circle that extends to
the east window of his chamber. When the conjuration is complete, a multitude
of spirits will appear in the sky, with many horses; the magician must choose the
horse with the red bridle, which will descend outside his chamber. He may then
ride off, with sceptre and sword in hand. But he must beware of committing any
sins while engaged in this experiment, because if he is unclean he can no longer
command the demon. The writer then tells a cautionary tale – from his own
experience, he says – to impress upon the reader the importance of not sinning in
the course of this adventure:
For I myself once travelled from Alexandria to India in the space of an hour,
and there I saw women whom I found very pleasing indeed, and at once I had
my will with one of them. But there was no chance of finding a confessor
unless I waited quite some time. I returned to my horse, which was standing
where it had been conjured [to stand], but when I seized the end of the bridle
the horse began to bolt, not allowing me to put my foot in the stirrup because
of my uncleanness. I held on to the bridle firmly, and the horse hurled me
forty feet into the air. Finally, seeing that I was going to perish miserably, I let
go and fell, breaking my leg quite badly. So I lay there in India for four
months, and until I had recuperated I could not go and see my horse.
But when I had recovered I went to confession and did penance. Then I
prepared a chamber for myself, and had a sceptre, sword and ring newly
made, since the ring which I had defiled had lost its power. When these
instruments had been fashioned and newly consecrated, I summoned those
same spirits as before, and had them bring the same spirit or horse. With


--- PAGE 59 ---
conjurations I commanded that horse and mounted him peacefully, and I kept
on riding him continually for an entire month, except when I dismounted to
sleep and eat or drink, and thus I circled the globe eight times. And I had him
carry me through the sky until I was practically suffocated because of the
pressure of the air. In circling the globe I discovered many and wondrous
treasures, whose virtues I learned later on under the instruction of one of the
spirits, whom I then locked up. And thus [by this long riding] I caused my
horse much grief.
When I finally dismounted from him and asked him why he had harmed
me, he replied that from that point on he was unable to do so, but he said he
would rather have been in hell than keep riding for so long a time. So he
asked me not to cause him such grief any more, and he would minister to me
faithfully when I summoned him, so long as I was clean. And thus I repaid
him evil for evil.1
The ceremony given here for conjuring the horse is borrowed, perhaps
directly, from the De nigromancia or Thesaurus spirituum ascribed to Roger
Bacon.2 In the cautionary tale the reader will recognize a variation on a story
known from The Thousand and One Nights, from the French romances
(especially Li Roumans de Cléomadès of Adenès li Rois), and from Chaucer’s
abbreviated and mock-naturalistic retelling in The Squire’s Tale.3 In the Arabic
and French versions, a magical flying horse cannot be made to descend where
the rider wishes to land, and the change of plan that results becomes a factor in
development of the plot. In the Rawlinson manuscript as in the literary versions
of the tale, the Orient is portrayed as exotic and romantically alluring, although
the seduction scene has become a peremptory telling of a male fantasy, with little
trace of the écriture féminine that has been seen in the literary narratives.4 What
concerns the narrator here is less the seduction than its consequences. Very much
like Lancelot in the Quest of the Holy Grail, the magician is unable to continue
his mission until repentance and confession wipe away his disability.5
The moral implications of this story need not detain us now, although the
moral ambiguity recurs in this manuscript, in a lengthy Confiteor which admits
to every manner of sin but terminates in a prayer for power over certain spirits.6
As for the world of flying horses, it seems not unlike that of Jubertus of
Regensburg, who flew to diabolical assemblies with wondrous speed not on the
back of a horse but on the excrement of a mule or horse, ministerio dyabolorum.7
For present purposes what is most relevant is that the form of magic related in


--- PAGE 60 ---
this story is intended chiefly for the sake of the magician’s own entertainment,
and the story about its use is, despite the tone of moral seriousness, a means of
entertainment presumably both for writer and reader. The compiler of the
Munich handbook, too, is most inclined toward the anecdotal when he is telling
his reader how to conjure illusions in which demons appear as horses, castles
appear out of nowhere, banquets are brought forth with many apparent but
illusory courses, and the magician dons a cloak of invisibility so as no longer to
appear at all.
Depictions of magic in medieval literature often tease the reader with
uncertainties about the boundary between illusion and reality.8 When the water
level off the coast of Brittany is raised so as to cover the rocks, in Chaucer’s
Franklin’s Tale, is the transformation real or merely an illusion?9 When
wondrous pageants and spectacles are brought forth by inexplicable means at
court, are they genuine or delusory, and are they worked ‘by craft or
necromancy’? The literature of magic is replete with stories of magicians who
produce magical banquets, horses or boats that can transport people over land
and sea, castles with armed warriors, all of which have a tendency to vanish
abruptly, suggesting that they rest on dubious ontological foundations. From
antiquity and through the Middle Ages, critics of magic insisted it was all
illusion, by which they could mean many things: that it was a means by which
demons deluded and ensnared the gullible, that its accomplishments were unreal
and not lasting, that healings as well as spectacles worked by magic were
unreliable.10 The pagan Celsus, taunting his Christian contemporaries in late
antiquity, compared the miracles of Jesus with ‘the works of sorcerers who
profess to do wonderful miracles, and the accomplishments of those who are
taught by the Egyptians, who for a few obols make known their sacred lore in
the middle of the market-place and drive daemons out of men and blow away
diseases and invoke the souls of heroes, displaying expensive banquets and
dining-tables and cakes and dishes which are non-existent, and who make things
move as though they were alive although they are not really so, but only appear
as such in the imagination’.11 But it was not only the critics who saw at least
some types of magic as entailing illusion: the magicians themselves seemed to
revel in their role as illusionists. Not surprisingly, then, many of the formulas in
our necromantic handbook – and several of the most interesting – involve some
form of illusion.
Illusionist experiments in the Munich handbook


--- PAGE 61 ---
Twelve of the experiments in Clm 849 are ‘illusionist’ ones, intended to make
things appear other than as they are: to make people perceive some object or
scene that is not in fact present, to obtain a means of transport such as a horse or
a boat, to make the dead seem alive or vice versa, or to become invisible. This
category might be seen as a subset of the ‘psychological’ experiments, but the
emphasis here is less on deception of the senses than on production of an
objective display that seems different from what it is.
The distinguishing features of these experiments are chiefly four. First, either
they are highly complex, with complicated magic circles, intricately worked-out
rituals, and at least two conjurations, or else (less often) they are very simple,
with no circles, relatively simple rituals, and single conjurations. Second, they
often emphasize the need for secrecy, yet the basic point of the experiment is the
fascinating and awe-inspiring display of magical powers. Third, these
experiments are often accompanied by stories (such as the one from the
Rawlinson manuscript) or by testimonials assuring the reader of their efficacy.
Fourth, these illusionist experiments, for all their exuberant fantasy, come closer
than any others in the handbook to touching on themes that would become
central to the late medieval and early modern conception of witchcraft.
Seven complex experiments (nos 6–11 and 15) involve relatively elaborate
magic circles and intricate rituals, with two distinct conjurations (first the master
summons the spirits, who appear to him, then he commands them to execute
some illusion, and they do so). Among further complications are offerings made
to induce the spirits to carry out the commands, oaths required of the spirits, and
provisions for repeating on some future occasion, with less effort, an experiment
already produced once. The simpler experiments (nos 14, 17, 21, 43 and 45), by
way of contrast, require no magic circles at all, and have illusionist effect
following directly from a single conjuration, without an intervening apparition of
spirits. The difference may be the result of nothing more than the handbook’s
general tendency toward simpler, less colourful and imaginative formulations in
its later sections, a tendency seen even in this most fanciful category of magic.
At certain points in the illusionist experiments of the Munich handbook the
writer comments explicitly on the need for secrecy. At the end of one experiment
(no. 8) the writer comments that this book, containing generally unknown names
and figures of spirits ‘according to their characteristics’ (proprietates), should be
kept in a hidden place because its contents have ineffable efficacy. Experiment
no. 10, which can make the living appear dead and the dead alive, must be kept
secret because of its great power. In this and in no. 11 the master goes to a


--- PAGE 62 ---
remote and secret place outside town to carry out his experiment. Experiment no.
15 must be carried out in a high and secret place. This concern with the esoteric
nature of necromancy is not exclusively found in the illusionist experiments –
no. 5 also emphasizes the importance of performing the ritual in a secret place,
and the text insists that this experiment must be kept secret because it has
‘ineffable virtue’ – but it is a theme found perhaps most often in this category,
and the breathless tone thus imparted adds to the entertainment value of these
illusionist experiments.12 Elsewhere, rather than emphasizing the need for
secrecy, the writer comments on the rarity of knowledge about certain formulas.
He declares that the art of conjuring an illusory banquet in no. 6 is practically
unknown in his day, and that ‘Matthew the Spaniard’ was utterly ignorant of this
magic; he notes that the art of obtaining a cloak of invisibility, in no. 11, is also
virtually unknown in his day. But the themes of secrecy and obscurity are not
unrelated: they are both ways of emphasizing the esoteric nature of these
experiments, and stressing that the reader is being initiated into arcane lore that
should arouse not only curiosity but also excitement and a sense of privilege. Yet
it is in the nature of these experiments that in one way or other most of them are
shared: in some cases the result of the magical is a spectacle that may be put on
for the wonderment of others, and even when the point is for the magician to
become invisible, his very state of non-visibility is a way of relating to others.
The testimonials asserting the efficacy of the experiments take various forms.
The writer declares that he has seen one experiment (no. 8) worked in various
ways, but the way he gives is the best, entailing least effort and no danger. In
recounting the effects of another experiment (no. 10) he claims that he has
personally experienced them all, and that he leaves unmentioned those effects he
has not experienced. Nor is he shy about claiming the testimony of authorities:
Socrates himself, he claims, speaks of the power of one circle (no. 9) in his book
of magic. More simply, he asserts that experiment (experiencia) no. 10 is ‘most
worthy’. At one point (no. 6) the writer addresses a courtly reader, whether real
or imagined, claiming to remind him of occasions when the magic has worked:
‘You have often seen me exercise this art in your court, namely that of bringing
forth stewards’. In a similar vein he tells how he once carried out experiment no.
7 while the emperor and his nobles were out hunting in a dark wood, causing an
illusory castle to appear, with demons in the form of knights who attacked the
emperor and his men.
What are we to make of all this? Are we to assume that the illusionist
experiments in this manuscript – and the tales that the writer spins, testifying to


--- PAGE 63 ---
the efficacy of his own illusions – were intended merely as entertainment? Is it
unthinkable that the clerical necromancers actually hoped to visit exotic lands on
flying horses, to explore phantom castles, to feast at magical banquets? The
question is difficult to answer in any simple way, because what one writer will
write tongue in cheek another may intend as fact, and because in many ways the
border between imaginative fantasy and perceived fact is readily permeable:
fantasies about harm that other people might inflict shade into paranoid fears of
harm that they are inflicting; erotic fantasies, encouraged by techniques of erotic
magic, can serve as prelude to actual seduction; purely recreational play with a
Ouija board or tarot deck gives occasion for traumatic expression of deep-seated
fantasies and anxieties; words spoken as playful boasts may be heard as
confirmation of sinister powers.
The tales told in this necromantic manuscript are perhaps best described as
literary boasts, analogous to those in medieval literature.13 And yet they are no
less fantastic than those recorded in the witch trials of the later fifteenth and
following centuries, and in some ways these tales are not unrelated to aspects of
witchcraft. Indeed, this category of experiments more than others has points of
contact with the ‘cumulative concept’ of witchcraft that became established in
the fifteenth century, even if the parallels are not exact.14 When the master has
the demons take an oath (no. 6), this is conceived as unilateral; it is therefore not
a pact. The spirits swear on an unspecified but consecrated book, and they bind
themselves first by the God who created them and all things, second by the
(presumably demonic) lords whom they fear and adore, and third by ‘the law
that we observe’. The second and third elements in this oath presuppose what
scholastic demonology did in fact generally assume, that demons are bound by a
perverse hierarchy of their own – an inversion of the angelic hierarchy – and that
there are infernal laws by which the demons are bound.15 The banquet that
demons bring forth is in one particular like the feasts ascribed in later years to
witches at their sabbaths: the food does not really exist, so that the more one eats
the hungrier one becomes, and a starving man who eats such fare will die just as
if he ate nothing at all.16 And in both no. 17 and no. 43, the magician is told that
when he is flying on an illusory horse he must not make the sign of the cross, or
the horse (in fact a spirit in the form of a beast) will flee from him, just as the
witches were said to be warned.17 (By way of contrast, the instructions for no. 8
spe