SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 14/39  |  CHARS: 306492-331492 of 911762
============================================================

sion in the sword-blade in
order that they might slander that good man and break the bonds of
charity between those kinsfolk, and bring the man who believed in them
to eternal perdition, both him and his.25
Not surprisingly, the diviners themselves could be subject to prosecution
on the ground of false accusation, as when the sum of £40 was stolen from
John Haddon of Coventry in the mid-1480s, and he consulted necromancers
to find the thieves; they charged one William Lee, a poor man, who had


--- PAGE 125 ---
been seen wearing the same garments that the necromancers had determined
were worn by the guilty parties. Lee petitioned on his own behalf, pleading
that the accusation rested on false and illicit proceedings:
Humbly showeth and pitiously complaineth unto your good lordship
your daily orator William Lee of the city of Coventry, that where forty
pounds of money was taken and withdrawn from one John Haddon of the
said city, draper, as the said John hath reported and said, whereupon the
said John, to get knowledge of the takers of the said money, caused
certain persons using the crafts of sorcery, witchcrafts and necromancy
[Nygromancy] to inquire by their crafts of the takers of the said money,
and thereupon the said persons using the said unlawful crafts advised and
counseled the said John Haddon to take and examine your said orator for
withdrawing of the said money, for as much as they perceived that your
said orator used and wore such garments and clothing as they determined
by their unlawful witchcrafts that the takers of the said money had and
used at the time of the taking of the said money. And thereupon the said
John Haddon, having no other cause against your said orator nor matter
of suspicion, arrested and put in prison your said orator and kept him
there by the space of a month and more. And after this the said John,
having no other cause nor nothing of untruth could prove against your
said orator, suffered him to depart and go at his large. And after this the
said John Haddon, intending the further vexation and trouble of your said
orator, made a plaint of trespass before the mayor and sheriffs of the said
city against your said orator concerning the taking of the said money,
supposing that your said orator the Wednesday next before the feast of
the Annunciation of Our Lady last past took and bore away the said
money. In the which plaint of trespass your said orator is like to be
condemned, for as much as your said orator is in poverty and the said
John Haddon is of great might and power and great alliance in the said
city. Wherefore and for as much as the said cause of trespass and the said
wrongful arresting and keeping of your said orator in prison was by
means and judgment of the said persons using the said unlawful crafts of
necromancy and witchcraft, to whom credence ought not to be given, for
that is contrary to the faith of Holy Church. In consideration whereof that
it would please your good lordship to grant a certiorare to be directed to
the said mayor and sheriffs, etc.26


--- PAGE 126 ---
Divinatory conjuration could, of course, be used for other purposes as
well, such as finding buried treasure. A group of men were tried in Norfolk
in 1465 for using necromancy to discover such a trove. Allegedly they
invoked and made sacrifice to accursed spirits. When a spiritus aerialis
appeared, at Bunwell, they promised it the body of a Christian man in
exchange for its leading them to treasure; the spirit revealed in a crystal the
location of a hill filled with treasure, whereupon the adventurers baptized a
rooster with a Christian name and sacrificed it to the spirit.27 Thomas Forde
was sentenced to the pillory at London in 1418 for having defrauded women
by claims of magical power: he had extorted money from one woman, and
attempted to gain her hand in marriage, by suggesting he could determine
where her late husband had buried a chest containing over £200; he had told
another of his victims that he could recover for her the gold cloth that had
been stolen from her.28 Other cases too may have involved a substantial
measure of straightforwardly cynical charlatanry, but in these instances it
seems all the more apparent. It is magic of this sort that gives rise to jest in
the tale of Mary of Nijmeghen, where the Devil boasts:
I am beginning to teach people how to find hidden treasure; and only
yesterday it cost one of them his life. I told him where there was a
treasure hidden and growing mouldy, in a stable, underneath a beam on
which the whole weight of the stable was resting. I told him that he
would have to dig deep into the ground, and he would find pound upon
pound of the hidden treasure. At once he started to dig there, but as soon
as he had dug so far that he undermined the beam and the posts
supporting it, the beam fell to the ground and crushed this poor idiot
under it!29
At least in cases for detection of thieves, however, otherwise responsible
individuals seem rather often to have placed credence in the claims of the
diviners, perhaps because they were desperate, and perhaps because what
they really sought was a way of persuading others to support a suspicion
they themselves already harboured.
Divinatory experiments in the Munich handbook
The largest number of experiments in Clm 849, nineteen in all, is divinatory.
While it is sometimes said that these experiments may be used for any of


--- PAGE 127 ---
various purposes, the usual end is detection of a crime or criminal (usually a
thief, less often a murderer) and recovery of stolen goods, more rarely to
determine the location of hidden treasure. The text of one experiment (no.
25) insists that the procedure must not be used for any base or frivolous
purpose, but only for a serious one, because one must not take the name of
God in vain.
As for the techniques used in these experiments, the characteristic
features in most of them are two. First, the primary magical technique is
scrying, combined with conjurations; magic circles either are not used or
have little significance.30 Second, cooperation of a medium, usually a young
boy, is vital; it is he alone who actually sees the spirits that are conjured.
Approximately half of these experiments entail the use of a circle or
some other figure among the means for conjuring the spirits. The medium
typically sees the spirits in a mirror, crystal, vessel, bone, polished
thumbnail or fingernail. In most cases the medium must be a virginal boy,
who actually sees and communicates with the spirits.31 Sometimes we are
told that he must be younger than twelve, and born of legitimate marriage.32
Occasionally a girl may be used as well as a boy,33 but this provision is
relatively rare. The use of young and putatively innocent boys in divination
must be seen as part of a broader clerical fascination with the ideal of
innocent boyhood. In liturgical drama young boys dressed and acted ‘in the
manner of virgin women’, at least in part ‘to project the theme of virginity’,
as Nicholas Orme has phrased it.34
The use of a medium could well be a means for expression of socially
shared convictions about the likeliest suspects, but it is not entirely obvious
that this mechanism came importantly into play. Because the ritual was
private, it could more easily become a tool for the expression of individual
prejudice and animosity. Yet the one who saw the visions was neither the
client nor the master but instead a young boy, in all likelihood not one with
a personal interest in the outcome of the experiment. Apart from the obvious
matter of the youth’s sacred non-sexuality, his youth may have been
important mainly because it put him at some remove from the preformed
judgements of the adult principals and made possible a relatively neutral
accusation. It is, of course, also possible that the mere pretence of childish
innocence, neutrality and distance from adult biases was more important
than any real immunity of this sort.


--- PAGE 128 ---
Experiments involving mirrors
In his account of scrying with a steel mirror, Johannes Hartlieb says, ‘I have
seen masters who maintain they can prepare mirrors such that any man or
woman can see in them what they will.’ He also says that other reflecting
surfaces can be used; there are even priests who will use the very paten that
serves at mass to hold the host; they believe (falsely, adds Hartlieb) that
only angels and not demons can appear on such a consecrated object.35 One
might suppose that a mirror would make an ideal tool for divination that
requires concentration on a reflective surface, because mirrors are designed
specifically for reflection. A modern mirror, however, might be distinctly
inappropriate for this purpose precisely because it reflects too well and too
realistically, giving too little scope to imaginative play and the power of
suggestion. Perhaps the mirrors used in divinatory experiments were less
polished, but at least in some cases the magician is instructed to use a
polished mirror. We must assume that the point was not for the child
medium who gazed into the mirror to focus closely on his own face but to
use the mirror as a means for perceiving more numinous revelations. To be
sure, there are cultures in which the spectator’s own face reflected in a
mirror becomes a point of reference for visionary encounter; after staring for
hours at one’s own reflection one may identify one’s face with that of an
ancestor, or one may perceive it as a manifestation of one’s own true, inner
or archetypal self.36 In the Munich manuscript, however, there is no
suggestion that the medium’s own realistic image plays any role whatever.
The handbook contains five such experiments: two versions of the Mirror
of Floron (nos 18 and 19), the First Mirror of Lilith (no. 23), and two others
(nos 20 and 33). The Mirror of Floron in its first version may serve as a
useful introduction to these experiments:
Have a mirror made of pure steel, measuring one palm around, with a
handle for holding it, and have it bright and shiny like a sword. And have
it made in the name of Floron, and around the rim of the mirror, on the
part that is not polished, have these ten names [Latranoy, Iszarin, Bicol,
Danmals, Gromon, Zara, Ralkal, Sigtonia, Samah and Meneglasar]
inscribed with ten characters, with the name of the aforesaid spirit
[Floron] written in the middle. After it has been made, it should be
anointed with pure and bright balsam, and fumigated with aloes,
ambergris, myrrh and white frankincense.


--- PAGE 129 ---
When this has been done, the master of this work should sit and have
this mirror held with both hands by a virgin boy before his chest. The
master himself should be bathed and dressed in clean garments. Before
he begins to exercise this work he should sprinkle in the air honey, milk
and wine, mixed together in equal proportions, while saying, ‘O Floron,
respond quickly in the mirror, as you are accustomed to appear.’
When he has said this, he should read this conjuration before the
mirror: ‘Bismille araathe mem lismissa gassim gisim galisim darrgosim
samaiaosim ralim ausini taxarim zaloimi hyacabanoy illete laytimi
hehelmini betoymi thoma leminao vnuthomin zonim narabanorum
azarethia thathitat hinanadon illemay sard lucacef illemegiptimi
sitaginatim 
viaice 
hamtamice 
tatiala 
taltarini 
alaoht 
haleytum
gaptametuntij morto orfail geibel huabaton albital hualepin halmagrilie
hualeon huastanie hualtamemeth huatorzor illenie giptimi tatgnie
gathegine lesuma lesanim aptasale albweroahit vlleath alfard vsemeth
aptisile abfluwarth vllelath ant clulamoralie hahysitimi waleles lithimi
caegine catliegineles mirabolamini abtasile albiwahith alleath halamaton
vnitia gaytatalon huaia gay soze cemeselis phalmorath bethathure huaba
lagis illemeammitimi gelgine gathegine lesmiraptalibe albiwath vleuth.’
When he has recited this conjuration, the master should look in the
mirror, and he will see an armed knight seated on a horse, and his squire
accompanying him. The knight will dismount from the horse and his
squire will hold the horse. He will greet the knight [with the words], se
desperata, decentissime visibiliter greciomo. And then the master may
ask him about past, present and future things, and he will at once give
full response in writing.
This should not seem unbelievable to you, whoever may execute this
work, for when you have carried out these things nine times this same
spirit will clearly reveal face to face, orally, all things which previously
he has indicated in writing.
And so, when you have completed everything according to your will,
command this spirit to withdraw in peace, and to return according to the
command of his master when he is summoned.
The second version of this Mirror of Floron adds certain details: the mirror
should be made on the first hour on Friday, under a waxing moon; the
sculptor or workman must be chaste for nine days beforehand, must be


--- PAGE 130 ---
bathed, and must wear clean clothes; the words in which the master conjures
the spirit are identified, implausibly, as ‘Chaldean’; the master’s greeting to
the knight is Parate insilitio gytromon, which approximates an obviously
meaningful statement even less than the greeting in the first version; and the
knight who has at first answered questions in writing will answer per
exercicium at night and orally throughout the day, revealing all things
beneath the moon.
The First Mirror of Lilith (spelled Lilit or Lylet) is dedicated to this
ancient Hebrew demon and to her followers and her ‘knights’ – although the
text seems to slip into calling the spirit Bylet before the experiment is over.37
The master commands these ‘demons’ to appear in non-threatening form
and answer questions. The mirror itself can be made in the form of a shield,
but need not be. The master prays to Lilith to come in her own appearance,
not in that of ravens, conjuring her to sit with him whenever the master
wants. She will appear in a mirror with two or more servants, and will tell
the truth or give appropriate signs regarding a theft, murder, or other
circumstance.
In one of the remaining experiments (no. 20) the master goes to a secret
place at a conjunction of Venus and Jupiter, with burning candles and a
polished steel mirror, made under a particular phase of the moon. He makes
a circle, and puts the mirror on a piece of wood in the form of a knife. He
implores God to make the mirror grow and become bright. Then he recites a
brief conjuration three times, and the mirror will seem to grow and become
bright. Many people will appear, as in a field. The master may ask them
anything he wants, and will obtain an answer. After the first time, he may
work this procedure whenever and wherever he wishes, though he must
always do so in a secret place; once consecrated for that purpose, the mirror
can be used repeatedly. In the other experiment (no. 33), the master smears
olive oil on a mirror, says a doxology, enters a magic circle that is sprinkled
with verbena, turns to the east, and conjures a spirit. When it comes, he
conjures it to tell him the truth, without causing any harm. If the spirit
refuses, the master reads the unbreakable ‘bond of Solomon’, an extended
conjuration.
As in some of the illusionist experiments, spirits who appear to divulge
information are here designated as knights. But three of these experiments
are more distinctive in being given titles, taken from the chief spirits to
whom they appeal, Lillith and Floron. The former is familiar from Hebrew


--- PAGE 131 ---
tradition, while the latter is known from the writings of Cecco d’Ascoli.38
The conjuration (and presumably also the greeting) in ‘Chaldean’ (actually
garbled Arabic, as we shall see in Chapter 6) adds a touch of exoticism to
some of these experiments. But perhaps the most curious feature, found in
the Mirror of Floron, is the reference to the spirit’s giving written responses,
through a mechanism that is not clearly specified; perhaps the master is to
see the spirit holding a written message for his inspection, or possibly
patterns discerned on the surface of the mirror are to be interpreted as some
form of writing.
Experiments involving crystals
For the use of crystals and related objects in scrying, Johannes Hartlieb is
again a helpful source of information:
Some take a clear, fine, polished crystal or beryl and have it consecrated,
then keep it clean, and lay incense, myrrh, and so forth on it. Then when
they wish to exercise their art they wait for a clear day, or use a clean
room with many consecrated candles. The masters go to a bathing room,
taking an innocent child, and dressing themselves in pure white clothes.
They sit down and speak magic prayers (zauber bätt), and burn magic
offerings (zauber opffer), then order the boy to look into the stone and
whisper secret words into his ear, which are allegedly most holy – but are
indeed devilish words.39
The Munich handbook gives two divinatory experiments entailing the
use of crystals, both of them extremely brief and simple. The implement
used may be something like the legendary crystal ball; when the Rawlinson
necromantic manuscript refers to crystals it speaks of them as ‘stones’,
which surely were polished, whatever their shape. In one experiment (no.
24) the master first takes a crystal and washes it with wine, then he writes
certain names of Christ on it with olive oil, and asks for two or three angels
to appear in that crystal and reveal the truth to a virgin boy. The boy
conjures these angels to come in the crystal so he may see them. When they
come, the boy conjures them thrice to sit on golden seats and not withdraw
from the crystal without the master’s permission. For the other experiment
(no. 25) the master takes a crystal in the form of a seal or mirror and places
it in wax. Then he writes the name ‘Honely’ on it with oil. He prays Christ


--- PAGE 132 ---
to bestow wondrous and useful powers upon this stone, as he has done to
other stones, to herbs, and to certain words; the text refers to this prayer as a
conjuration, but the writer does not have quite the temerity to conjure Christ
himself. He does then conjure certain angels to come at once and appear in
the crystal, and not withdraw from it until they have answered the questions
he has to ask.
It is probably not an accident that in both of these experiments, unlike
most, the spirits conjured are expressly referred to as angels, and in one of
them names of Christ are invoked (which is not uncommon in these
experiments), while in the other the conjuration is preceded by a prayer to
Christ (which is altogether uncommon). The other reflecting surfaces have a
kind of artificial reflectivity: some of them need to have oil applied to them,
and a mirror is a manufactured object. The crystal, however, was thought to
have natural luminosity as one of the properties bestowed on it in its
creation. Perhaps for this reason it seemed more natural for a crystal to serve
as a medium for the conjuring of unfallen spirits, although this explanation
would have greater force if it were supported by substantial evidence from
other sources.
A complex experiment involving apparitions in a thumbnail
Five divinatory experiments in the Munich handbook – as many as those
using mirrors – require the medium to gaze into his own polished fingernail
or thumbnail. These tend to be elaborate rituals, with preliminary measures
followed by multiple conjurations, then interrogation of the spirits who
appear, and in some cases procedures for terminating the experiment. Most
of these rituals are intended specifically to learn about the circumstances of
a theft, although the text indicates that no. 27 (and presumably others as
well) can serve to provide information about whether a friend is well or
sick, whether someone is on the road, or other matters. A fingernail may
seem an odd instrument for divination, and the image of a boy carrying on a
conversation with an elaborately described demon moving about on such a
small screen may seem somewhat comic, but fixing the boy’s attention on
so narrow a space may in fact have been an aid to concentration: the smaller
the surface, and the closer it is held to the eye, the more it will be in focus
and potential distractions will be out of focus.
No. 27 is broken into two ‘chapters’, the first of which reads as follows:


--- PAGE 133 ---
To find out about a theft, take a virgin boy of legitimate birth, at
whatever hour you wish before noon, and scrape well the thumb nail of
his left hand with a knife. Then bind to the same thumb, beneath the nail,
a slip with the following names written on it. And these are the names:
Egippia, Benoham, Beanke vel Beanre, Reranressym, Alredessym,
Ebemidyrr, Fetolinie [?], Dysi, Medirini, Alhea, Heresim, Egippia,
Benoham [repeated], Haham, Ezirohias, Bohodi, Hohada, Anna,
Hohanna, Ohereo, Metaliteps, Aregereo, Agertho, Aliberri, [and] Halba.
When this is done, if the boy does not see something, etc. [sic!]. But if
he does see something, bind a strap of sheepskin, which you have had
with you while hearing three complete masses, on the slip, around the
thumb, while saying this conjuration: ‘O you demons, who have
appeared before me in the nail of this boy, by Him who is Alpha and
Omega, I order and command and conjure you, by the most sacred names
Ely, Eloy, Messias, Sother, Emmanuel, Sabaoth, [and] Adonay, and by
On, which is the first name of the Lord, Pantoncraton [sic], Anetheten,
and by the other names known and unknown to me, that you should have
no power to withdraw with your companions until you have fulfilled my
will completely, without any falsehood or harm to anyone. And if you
disdain to do this, I command you to be bound beneath the deep waters
of the sea, by these two names, Joth [and] Nabnoth, by which Solomon
bound demons in a glass vessel. I conjure you by the seven signs of
Solomon, and by his seal and wisdom, that you should have no licence to
withdraw from here until you have told and shown me the truth about all
that I ask.’
When you have said this, if the boy does not speak straightaway,
recite this conjuration in his ear: ‘I conjure you, virginal youth, by the
true God Basyon, and by the name[s] On, Berion, Sabaoth, [and]
Adonay, [etc.], to have no power of concealing from me, but to manifest
all that you see.’
When you have recited these conjurations three times, if the spirits do
not hasten to your service, add this conjuration: ‘You demons from the
east, you demons from the west, you demons from the south, you
demons from the north, open up to us, Discobermath, Archidemath,
Fritath, Altramat, Pestiferat, Helyberp, Hegergibet, Sathan.’
When you have spoken or repeated this conjuration three times, the
boy will see all things clearly.


--- PAGE 134 ---
This experiment is good also if someone wishes to know the condition
of his friends, whether they are well or ill, and it will determine whether
or not they are under way.
The conjuration over the strap is as follows. When mass has been
finished on any particular day, say this conjuration over the strap: ‘I
conjure you, Sona, by the name of the Lord Tetragrammaton, and by the
name of God Joth, and by the name of God Nabnoth, [etc.], to receive
such power that wherever you are bound, these spirits will have no
power to withdraw until they fulfil the will of the one who binds.’
The second chapter begins with a lengthy conjuration summoning the spirits
to appear in the boy’s nail, and is followed by another conjuration
commanding the boy to gaze into his nail and tell the truth about what is
there revealed. The text continues:
Then ask the boy if the nail is brighter than before. If he says not, read
the conjuration again from the beginning, and a third time if necessary. If
he says it has become brighter, ask if he sees anything. If he says he sees
a man, the master should have the boy conjure the one he sees, in the
mother tongue, as follows: ‘You who are before me, I conjure you by the
Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and by Saint Mary and her
virginity, and by Saint John and his virginity, [etc.], to go quickly for
your king and have him come before me, so that I may see and
understand him clearly.’
Then ask the boy if the king has come. If not, have the boy conjure
again, as before. If he has come, have the boy tell the king to dismount
from his horse and have a throne brought forth on which he can sit. Then
have the boy ask the king if he wishes to eat. If he says no, then ask
about whatever you will. If he says yes, have the boy tell the king to send
wherever he will for a ram to be skinned and cooked, and then he should
have a table set, and should rise and wash his hands, and sit at the table
and have the ram set before him, and he should go ahead and eat it. After
he has eaten, he should get up, take water, and wash his hands.
Then have the boy tell the king to remove the crown from his head
and place his righ