SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 5/39  |  CHARS: 92645-116654 of 911762
============================================================

f the materials magicians are likely to have used,
and that such texts thus hold significance going well beyond their meagre
intellectual pretensions. I will make some effort to situate the component parts of
the text within their literary context – to cite sources and parallels. For the most
part, however, I will focus on the contents of this specific compilation, this
microcosm of clerical magic as it was known in the late Middle Ages.
Necromancy and Necromancers in Fifteenth-Century Munich


--- PAGE 45 ---
The fact that our necromantic manuscript is now in the Bavarian State Library is
not, of course, any indication that it came originally from Munich or even from
Bavaria, but its inclusion among the earlier codices of the collection suggests
that, wherever its materials were first assembled, they may have been brought to
Munich and acquired by the ducal library at an early date. Even if this
connection is conjectural, it may thus be interesting to inquire what we know of
the practice and perception of necromancy in late medieval Munich. The short
answer to this question is that not a great deal is known about necromancers and
necromancy specifically in and around Munich in the fifteenth century, yet there
are some clues that may help place Clm 849 within a general historical context.
The witch trials conducted in the Dauphiné during the years 1428–47 provide
an interesting side light of possible relevance. One of the many subjects brought
before the judges in this campaign was a sixty-year-old man, Jubertus of
Bavaria, from Regensburg, tried in 1437 at Briançon.17 Apart from accusations
more or less typical of the incipient prosecution for conspiratorial witchcraft
(flight to nocturnal assemblies, killing of infants, etc.), Jubertus was charged
with activities more often found in connection with clerical necromancy:
First, the aforesaid Jubertus said and confessed, under freely taken oath …
that he is sixty years of age, and that for ten years and more he served a
certain powerful man in Bavaria who was called Johannes Cunalis, who is a
priest and plebanus, in a city called Munich in Bavaria, near Bohemia.
Likewise, he said and confessed that this Johannes Cunalis had a book of
necromancy [librum de nigromancia], and that when he who spoke opened
this book at once there appeared to him three demons, one named Luxuriosus,
another Superbus, and the third Avarus, [all of them] devils. And the first
appeared to him in the form of a charming maiden of twelve years, and she
slept with him at night and took their pleasure together.
Likewise, during the night he adored that devil as a god, on bended knee,
then turned his posterior toward the east and made a cross on the ground, and
spat on it three times, and trampled on it three times with his left foot, and
urinated and defecated on it, and wherever he saw a cross he spat upon it and
thrice denied God.
Likewise, at dawn he adored Superbus in the same way …
Likewise, he gave Superbus what was left over when he ate and drank, and
to Luxuriosus he gave three or five pence on Holy Friday before Easter, and
he committed both his bodily members and his soul after death. And these


--- PAGE 46 ---
devils wanted him to deny that God whom they called an accursed prophet
[maledictum prophetam], and when he adored those three demons as gods he
turned his face toward the west and his posterior toward the east, saying what
he said, and when he had his dealings with Luxuriosus the others laughed….
Likewise, he said that when he passed along the roads and was with the
demons and found a cross, the devils fled from it and made a great detour
around it, and they forbade him to do good deeds and to adore the sacred
host, and when it was elevated he was to close his eyes, and they forbade him
to take holy water and to kiss the cross or the pax [=osculatory], asserting that
they alone were almighty gods.
Likewise, he said and confessed that on Sunday, the seventeenth of this
month, all three demons were standing with him in prison, and their eyes
glowed like sulphurous fire, and they said to the prisoner that they would
guard him well if he did not reveal these things. Then he had dealings and
mingled carnally with Luxuriosus, and he said furthermore that these demons
would have freed him from prison if he had not revealed these things.
Likewise, he said and confessed that these devils then told him that he
would be examined more subtly the next day, and that he would have to tell
the full truth, and that he would thus be given over to death …
Likewise, he said and confessed that once he was passing with his master
through a forest in which there were thieves, but they put them to flight with a
multitude of devils who appeared in the form of soldiers. He said further that
the world is filled with invokers of demons, and that these devils profit
greatly from these things, especially because the world is full of sins, wars
and dissensions.
Likewise, he said and confessed that one night with the aid of demons his
master had a bridge constructed over a river in Bavaria at a place called
Sancta Maria Heremitta.18
Likewise, he said and confessed that he had proposed to blind Johanneta,
the widow of Johannes Paganus of the present place, because she displeased
him. With two keys he had traced her image, in a manner and form which he
explained in the examination; he did this on a Sunday, depicting her image
beneath the name[s] of devils, using implements, materials and techniques
described in the examination, just as he had done in the duchy of Austria in
the case of a man called Johannes Fabri of Vienna. And he had disclosed this
deed and boasted of it before his capture….
Likewise, he said and confessed that about two years ago he was in the


--- PAGE 47 ---
city of Vienna in Austria, and one Thursday there were three drunken cooks
in a tavern who refused to let him drink, and when they withdrew at a late
hour one of them said to the other two, ‘Get up, in the devil’s name, and let
me pass by!’ And at once, at the behest of the accused, all three demons of his
master seized those three, snatched them out the door, and cast one of them
into a well, another into the sewer or privy of the Dominicans, and the third
into the privy of the Franciscans, and none of them but the one cast into a
well was killed, the others being freed by the friars at the time of matins.
Likewise, he said and confessed that poisons were made by the aid of
devils, by which men could be killed, through their working or by the aid of
demons, either at once or in a lingering death, according to the will of the one
administering, and according as more or less of the poison is administered, in
the name of the devil, in a manner and form contained in the examination,
and taken from a basilisk, toad, serpent, spider or scorpion….
Likewise, he said and confessed that when he was passing through the
roads and saw images of the Virgin Mary or a cross, he spat at them three
times in despite of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and that on the
feast of Saint John the Baptist he gathered certain herbs for medicine, as
specified in the proceedings, and on bended knees he first adored them, then
extracting them in the name of his devils, and in despite of almighty God, the
creator of all….
The link between necromancy and witchcraft emerges also from the work of
Johannes Hartlieb (c. 1400–68). Hartlieb served the duke of Bavaria in Munich
during the last three decades of his life, and between 1456 and 1464 he wrote
Das půch aller verpoten kunst (The Book of All Forbidden Arts) at the behest of
Margrave Johann (‘the Alchemist’) of Brandenburg-Kulmbach.19 Some have
seen the work as marking a departure from earlier work of Hartlieb’s that dealt
with the occult arts in a more sympathetic manner, but the attribution of most of
these works is at best doubtful: writings that he had in his library and consulted
to inform himself about the occult arts were in some instances falsely ascribed to
him. Some have read Das půch aller verpoten kunst as a clever excuse for
relating otherwise forbidden information to a curious reader, but Hartlieb does
not give enough particulars for his work to be of much use in magical practice.
Frank Fürbeth is surely correct in placing the work in a tradition of catechetical
writings for lay instruction, influenced in particular by Nicholas Magni of Jawor
and by the work of certain contemporary Viennese writers.20 Hartlieb lists


--- PAGE 48 ---
necromancy (nigramancia) as the first of the seven forbidden arts, along with
geomancy, hydromancy, aeromancy, pyromancy, chiromancy and spatulamancy.
His chapter 22 defines the term:
Nygramancia is the first forbidden art, and is called the black art. This art is
the worst of all, because it proceeds with sacrifices and services that must be
rendered to the devils. One who wishes to exercise this art must give all sorts
of sacrifices to the devils, and must make an oath and pact [verpintnuß ] with
the devils. Then the devils are obedient to him and carry out the will of the
master, as far as God permits them. Take note of two great evils in this art.
The first is that the master must make sacrifice and tribute to the devils, by
which he denies God and renders divine honors to the devils, for we should
make sacrifices only to God, who created us and redeemed us by his passion.
The other is that he binds [verpint] himself with the devil, who is the greatest
enemy of all humankind.21
Hartlieb’s categorization adapts that of Nicholas Magni and harks to much
earlier discussions of the branches of the magic arts. Isidore of Seville, who
deals with magic and especially magical divination in his Etymologies,22 speaks
of four species of divination which employ the four elements (geomancy,
hydromancy, aeromancy and pyromancy), but among other forms of divination
mentions the necromantici who resuscitate and interrogate the dead. Hugh of St
Victor’s Didascalicon borrows from Isidore, but organizes the divisions of magic
into five categories, of which the first, mantice, includes divination by
necromancy and by the four elements.23 Hartlieb cites Isidore of Seville’s more
restricted use of the term ‘necromancy’, for conjuring the shades of the dead, but
he himself uses it in the broader sense, essentially interchangeable with
‘demonic magic’.24
As indicated, Hartlieb’s portrayal of necromancy displays close links between
this art and the conspiratorial witchcraft that was emerging in both trials and
treatises at the time he wrote. The necromancer conjures the Devil with
characters and secret words, with fumigations and sacrifices, in addition to
making a pact with the Devil.25 The Devil acts as if the conjurer caused him pain
by his exorcizing and conjuring (beswern und pannen), although they actually
give him great satisfaction. In all these respects he might be taken as describing
the conspiratorial witch, although his explicit subject is the necromancer.
Hartlieb even discusses early witch trials at Rome and at Heidelberg within the


--- PAGE 49 ---
context of necromancy.26 Hartlieb’s reading and experience were wide: he claims
to have consulted with Greeks, Tartars, Turks and Jewish women about the
practice of these forbidden arts.27 His book is thus by no means specifically
about the magic practised in and around Munich. But it was while serving as
counsellor to the Duke of Bavaria that he gathered information from diverse
sources, making his study at Munich in effect a clearing house for knowledge
about magical activities.
The early history of Clm 849 is not established,28 and its ownership obviously
cannot be demonstrated. It is tempting to speculate that Hartlieb had it at his
disposal, along with numerous other books of necromancy and the allied arts.
Many of the practices Hartlieb describes are laid out in Clm 849 (e.g., the
anointing of a boy’s fingernail for scrying, or the conjuring of a demon in the
form of a horse for magical transportation), although, to be sure, there is little if
anything in his work that he could not have derived from other sources. Those
eager to fill in all the blanks might suggest that Jubertus actually consorted with
Johannes Cunalis, the priest of Munich, and that the Munich handbook of
necromancy was in fact the liber de nigromancia owned and used by this cleric.
The spontaneous appearance of Luxuriosus, Superbus and Avarus would on this
interpretation would have to be a way of talking about the spirits which inform
such a book – and it is perhaps no distortion to suggest that the spirit of lust
(luxuria) is one main incentive for the psychological experiments, the spirit of
pride (superbia) is a prime factor in the illusionist ones, and the spirit of avarice
(avaritia) is a key motive of the necromancer, and sometimes of his client, for
staging the divinatory ones.
Even if it were possible to establish a clear connection between Clm 849,
Jubertus and Hartlieb, one would hesitate to speak of Munich as in any special
way a centre for the practice of necromancy, or to postulate a distinctive
character to the magic used there. In all likelihood necromancy was studied and
practised within a kind of clerical underworld through much if not most of
Western Europe in the later Middle Ages. We have no reason to suppose that
Munich was in this respect different from any other city.
The composition of the Munich handbook
For reasons I have already touched upon, any discussion of how Clm 849 came
to be compiled must remain conjectural: the first two folios are missing, the
provenance of the manuscript remains obscure, there are no indications of either


--- PAGE 50 ---
authorship or ownership, and the disposition of the manuscript is complex.
Nonetheless, we can make some reasonable assumptions about the process by
which this handbook came into existence, and thus about the workings of the
‘clerical necromancy’ that would have produced and employed such a book.
We cannot speak of the writer of this manual as its ‘author’, because we do
not know to what extent he devised the formulations that he gives, or how far he
merely reproduced other people’s work. In some cases he deliberately gave
alternative forms of demons’ names,29 which suggests that he was working from
a previous manuscript and was unsure of the reading. The writer’s own
orthography was highly erratic; within the same experiment he sometimes
slipped from one version to another in his names for demons, and while the
variations were sometimes slight they were not always so.30 (At the end of the
fifteenth century, Humanist mages such as Johannes Reuchlin protested that the
debased magic of contemporary necromancers could have no effect because the
very names they used for the spirits were corrupt; the present manuscript might
have served as a case in point.)31 Whether the writer composed badly or copied
badly, one constant factor in the manuscript is that its Latin usage is
unconventional by medieval (let alone classical or Humanist) standards. In one
experiment the writer speaks of a ‘whole white dove’ (columbam totam albam)
when he means a ‘totally white dove’ (columbam totaliter albam); he writes that
a woman ‘will love all things above you’ (super te omnia diliget) when he
clearly means the reverse; he confuses ‘without’ (sine) with ‘or’ (siue), and he
evidently substitutes ‘prepare’ (parare) for ‘obey’ (parere).32 More often than
one would expect, he leaves other words out altogether. At times his sentences
give way to grammatical nonsense. The formula ‘May your arts fail … as
Jamnes and Mambres failed’ (Deficiant ergo artes tuae … sicut defecerunt
Iamnes et Mambres), referring to the names of Pharaoh’s magicians according to
a tradition reflected in II Timothy 3:8, is given once in the main block of Clm
849, and twice in later sections of the manuscript, by two different hands (no.
32). But in the main block the point of the allusion is lost and the comparison
comes out in utterly garbled form as ‘May your arts fail … so you and members
have now ceased’ (sic cessauerunt jam vos et membros), while in the other
versions the passage begins ‘Your ears will fail’ (Deficient ergo aures tuae …).
What seems quite clear is that the writer was a cleric – probably a priest, and
at least a person in minor orders. His use of Latin makes this a prima facie
likelihood, even if his Latin is bad. The more compelling evidence is his
assumption that the user of the manual will, like him, be acquainted with ritual


--- PAGE 51 ---
forms used in the Church’s services: he gives the opening line of Psalm 50 (from
the Vulgate) and assumes the user will know the text (no. 33); he prescribes the
seven (penitential) psalms and the litany (of the saints) and presumes that these
too will be familiar and accessible (no. 36). In short, the work appears clearly a
product of that clerical underworld in which late medieval necromancy seems to
have found something of a natural home. It may have been exercised and feared
as a means for gaining otherwise elusive power within a competitive clerical
establishment. It may have been a pastime for underemployed clerics with time
on their hands and a fondness for this quintessentially clerical form of dark and
daring entertainment. It may have been a service rendered to credulous clients by
unscrupulous providers of ritual. Like the Ouija board in latter day culture, it
may well have been all of the above, an amusement constantly in danger of
becoming serious, dark and threatening.
In certain important respects there are shifts in the content and tone of the
manuscript, suggesting changes in the compiler’s interests and his attitudes
toward the material. Along with a shift from illusionist and psychological
experiments to rites of divination comes a general flattening of the prose. It is in
the front of the manual that the writer is inclined to tell entertaining anecdotes
and to provide testimonials to the authenticity and efficacy of the rituals. The
earlier materials suggest more authorial self-consciousness, a clearer sense of
authorial voice. Later sections are less developed with narrative and other
embellishments. Even the magic circles required for the experiments and
illustrated in the manuscript tend to become less complex and less interesting in
the later sections of the compilation. The manual shifts also in its engagement of
the reader. In the earlier experiments the writer regularly addresses the reader in
a direct and personal manner, urging him to ‘attend carefully’ (no. 2), taking him
into his confidence by entrusting him with secret information (nos 4 and 9),
reminding him of a situation in which he has seen the master perform an
experiment (no. 6), and referring to his own needs and desires – ‘If you want to
have the love of any woman …’ (no. 3), ‘If you wish to infuse a spirit into a dead
person so that he appears alive …’ (no. 10), ‘If you wish to be taken for invisible
and imperceptible …’ (no. 11), ‘If you wish to know about any matter on which
you are doubtful …’ (no. 24). Subsequent experiments are couched in far more
impersonal rhetoric; the reader is instructed with blunt imperatives and
subjunctives, with no expression of interest in entertaining him or engaging his
interest. The later materials are less ambitious in their imaginative depth, but
more ambitious in laying out procedures likely to be put to actual use.


--- PAGE 52 ---
The most basic question about the actual composition of the book is whether
it is taken from a single source (as a set of excerpts from a cohesive treatise or as
a copy of some previous miscellany) or from multiple sources. The latter
scenario seems far more plausible, largely because there are occasional
discontinuities that suggest the compiler was working with a collection of
unbound materials that were not in perfect order, and he was perhaps not certain
about where to fit them into his series of experiments. The effect was similar to
that of assembling diverse materials in a scrapbook and finding that some of the
odds and ends assembled are not complete or entirely coherent. This type of
discontinuity would have been possible if the writer had been drawing excerpts
from a cohesive work or copying an earlier miscellany, but in the former case
one might have expected the individual units to remain cohesive, and in the latter
one might have thought the copyist would have rationalized or deleted the
incoherent fragments. At any rate, it appears not at all unlikely that the materials
bound together with the main handbook are examples of the sort of material
from which the compiler worked. My hypothesis is that the compiler and scribe
took a lively interest in various kinds of magical materials, put together a
personal collection of them from various sources, and had readily at hand
perhaps both bound and unbound writings of diverse character and provenance
(at least one bit of appended material contains a fragment of Italian); that the
materials that he copied into his own anthology represent his own selection (and
perhaps, as in the abridgement and reformulation of the conjuration of Mirage,33
his own adaptation) from this body of material, and that when his own
compilation was originally bound, or perhaps when at some later date it was
rebound, some of his sources may have been appended to it, perhaps simply
those of compatible format, forming fols. 109–56. This hypothesis rests solely
on the partial overlapping of contents between the main block and the appended
material, not on paleographic or codicological evidence; indeed, it could be
argued that at least some of the appended material seems to be by later hands,
although the chronological ordering would be difficult to establish with
confidence.
Alternative hypotheses cannot be altogether dismissed. It is possible, for
example, that the compiler worked simultaneously on two distinct collections of
material, perhaps fols 1–51 and fols 52–108, and that what appears to be a shift
from one mode of presentation to another results simply from the binding
together of what were intended as separate compilations. Had this been the
intent, however, one would have expected a clearer and more decisive shift than


--- PAGE 53 ---
in fact occurs: it is not the case that all the divinatory experiments, or all the
materials of any sort, are grouped together.
We can only speculate about the identity of the compiler. In two passages he
represents himself as connected with a court. He could have been a learned
courtier with an interest in the occult arts, such as Johannes Hartlieb, although
Hartlieb is more likely to have owned and consulted such a manuscript than to
have assembled it or used it.34 A closer model might be Michael Scot, who
served at the court of Frederick II and had an interest in astrology, as apparently
did the counsellors of several other German emperors, but there is no real
evidence that these astrologers dabbled in necromancy.35 The compiler might
have been a cleric, perhaps a member of the lower clergy, possibly a figure such
as the priest-necromancer who befriended Jubertus of Bavaria; or, to
compromise between these possibilities, he could have been a cleric of higher or
middling status who aspired to some position at court. If we could take seriously
the unlikely notion that Hartlieb began by taking an active interest in magic and
later became its critic and opponent, we might guess that this collection is his
and represents an early phase in his own development. To judge by the book’s
Latinity, I incline toward the hypothesis that what we have here is the work of a
man with some but not a great deal of learning, who would have tended more
toward the fringes of society than toward court, even if he had aspirations for
higher status that found expression in the early sections of his book but waned
over the time he worked on it.
Table B. Types of necromancy found in Clm 849


