SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 11/39  |  CHARS: 235475-259959 of 911762
============================================================

d, and you will see wonders. But if you cannot go before him or into
his dwelling, bury [them], as has been said, wherever you will, and you will
be loved by him above all things.
For Parmen[i]des used this experiment to obtain favour from the king of
the Persians.
This experiment requires two conjurations: one addressed to the image of the
dignitary in question, which is thrice ‘exorcized’ that it may secure honour from
the person represented; the other a ‘prayer’ addressed to eleven spirits


--- PAGE 99 ---
distinguished for their benevolence and their skill at inspiring concord. But the
heart of the experiment is a series of five imitative rituals involving both images:
first binding the two figures together, second binding the dignitary’s image to the
magician’s own with a small iron chain, third binding the hands of the
dignitary’s image behind its back, fourth bowing the head of the dignitary’s
image to the ground, and fifth placing the two figures together, with the
dignitary’s face touching the shoulders of his own image as a sign of subjection.
The sympathetic operations here are complex but suggest a sort of play,
almost like a child’s playful use of a toy. Like many experiments in the manual,
this one comes with a historical testimonial: ‘Parmenides’, we are told, used this
procedure to gain favour with the king of the Persians. Testimonials of this kind
are of course window-dressing, comparable to a herbal master’s fanciful claim
that one remedy was used by Plato himself.21 The concluding promise that the
magician ‘will see wonders’ is again a common formula,22 which blurs any
distinction between the magical and the wondrous or marvellous.
Erotic magic: background
If certain of these experiments can be seen as ‘friendly’ and others as hostile, the
experiments for love represent a curious mixture. The imitative procedures
involve violence: the image or other object that magically represents the desired
woman is burned or pierced. The immediate effect on the victim is likewise
violent: she is afflicted with obsessive passion, and has no rest until she yields to
the master’s desires. Ultimately, however, the woman does submit and is made to
feel more than mere friendship. The conception of love that is here assumed may
owe something at least indirectly to the tradition of courtly literature, and in
particular to its Ovidian sense that love is a disease or an affliction. One
Netherlandish compilation gives detailed instructions for ‘the best and surest
experiment in the world to secure friendship or love between a man and a
woman’, and says that in Latin such love is called ‘amor hereos’, and is burning
and indissoluble.23
The subject of erotic magic is too extensive to cover fully here,24 but at least
eight key points should be made by way of overview. First, magic may be used
to persuade or coerce another person to consent to sex (sex-inducing magic), to
intensify the sexual experience of already willing partners (sex-enhancing
magic), or to induce a lasting amorous relationship (love-magic). Second, the
most common technique for love-magic was administration of potions, as can be


--- PAGE 100 ---
seen from penitential prohibitions and secular legislation as well as literary
sources.25 Certain objects or substances borne on one’s person were also thought
to have aphrodisiac qualities, such as the stone allectory and the herb henbane.26
Third, while various herbs were used as aphrodisiacs (St John’s wort, valerian,
vervain),27 there seems to have been a preference for animal parts or human
substances (such as semen) either literally or symbolically associated with sex
and procreation.28 Fourth, in trials for erotic magic it was usually women who
were charged with alienating men’s affections through magical means, but the
surviving formulas for sex-inducing magic typically envisage the use of this
magic by men to entice unwilling women.29 Fifth, in both the trials and the
manuscript prescriptions, love-magic is most commonly intended to restore the
lost affections of a partner.30 Indeed, certain women accused of witchcraft seem
to have been specialists in such restoration of affection.31 Sixth, in astral magic
with erotic intent, the magical virtues whose potency seemed most relevant
were, obviously enough, those of Venus. Thus, a stone, metal plate or image
might be made on the day of Venus (Friday), at the hour of Venus, and bearing
the sign of Venus for use in such magic; one might even be advised to say a
‘prayer’ to the spirit associated with that planet.32 Seventh, the power of the
sacred might be employed in erotic magic, in ways that would presumably seem
blasphemous to authorities: a slip of parchment with a psalm on it might be left
where a prospective lover would walk, or a woman who kissed her husband
while holding a consecrated host in her mouth might gain his affection.33 A
prayer addressed to God might lead into a conjuration to compel a husband, or a
litany adapted to form a coercive spell.34 Eighth, erotic magic figures
prominently in medieval literature – in the romances especially, herbal love
potions frequently play a prominent role – but the significance of this magic is
often ambiguous. For example, in Thomas of Britain’s version of Tristan the
love potion seems to function as a symbol of the love that Tristan and Iseult have
already begun to feel, rather than as in any simple sense the cause of that love.35
The techniques for erotic magic mentioned so far were natural rather than
demonic, but sexual submission could also be won by necromancy. Oldradus da
Ponte explained in the early fourteenth century that invoking demons to tempt
women is mortally sinful but is not heresy, because temptation is proper to the
nature of demons and their use for this service thus implies no false belief.36
Formulas for such magic do survive. An experiment for love in the Liber de
angelis requires going to a crossroads or a gallows, entering a circle traced on
the ground, sacrificing a dove, tearing its flesh apart, dispersing the remains in


--- PAGE 101 ---
the air, and invoking a spirit of dubious character named Zagam (‘O Zagam,
accept this dove which I sacrifice to you!’). One must repeat this operation a
second and a third time; after the last of these sacrifices one adds, ‘I ask you, O
Zagam, and all your companions, to bring forth [the desired woman]’, who
should be burning with love for the magician and should comply with his will.
The next morning he must return to the circle and pick up whatever ‘figure’ he
finds there; he need only show this to the desired woman and she will love him
without bounds – as has been proven, the text adds.37 In a trial from the later
fifteenth century at Tournai, where a priest was charged with attempting to
seduce a girl by drawing her image in charcoal on a tile, baptizing the figure,
sprinkling it with holy water, making a second figure out of wax and baptizing it
as well, then conjuring demons according to a book of magic.38
The case from Tournai is highly reminiscent of the Netherlandish experiment
mentioned earlier as a technique for effecting amor hereos,39 combining prayer
and conjuration with image magic:
You must do it on a Friday in the first hour after midnight, under a waxing
moon. Take a tile fresh out of the oven and draw a picture, while saying, ‘I,
N., draw this picture in the form and likeness of the person N., daughter or
son of so-and-so.’ Make the picture with a steel pin [ punte]. Begin with the
head and proceed downward, saying, ‘May Venus help.’ … When [the image]
is done, make fire with any wood you will. Stand up, take the image in your
hand, turn south, and read this [Latin] prayer: ‘Almighty, eternal God, who in
the beginning created heaven and earth, the sea and all that is in them; who
created Adam and Eve according to your likeness and placed them in the
earthly paradise … I invoke you in supplication, most gracious Father; in
your great power hear me as I ask and knock [cf. Mt 7:7], that I may be able
to constrain those malign spirits, the angels who have power to bind a man to
a woman, and vice versa, a woman to a man, and especially those four spirits
who hold dominion and power over those spirits in the four parts of the globe,
to wit, Astaroth, Aroch, Godras, [and] Vynicon.’ Say this prayer three [more]
times [to north, east, and west]. Then say the following [Latin] conjuration,
turning first to the south: “O Astaroth, prince of the south, I conjure you with
all the [spirits] under your command, who have power to compel the love of a
woman or a man, by Alpha and Omega, the first and last, Abios, Abics,
Rubeus, Rubet, Caste, Hely, Messias, Sabaoth, Adonay, Sother, Emanuel; I
conjure you, N.; by the Annunciation of our Lord Jesus Christ; by his


--- PAGE 102 ---
Passion; by his Resurrection … by the head of your prince and King Lucifer
… and by all the infernal powers by whom you can be conjured and
entreated, that you should withdraw from your proper place in the south and
[carry out my command].’40
The case at Tournai is in at least one respect typical necromantic practice : the
alleged perpetrator was a cleric. Similarly, the use of Latin formulas in the Dutch
experiment suggests that the intended user was clerical, even if he was not in
major orders. Analogous cases are easily adduced. When the Carmelite friar
Peter Recordi was tried by an inquisitorial tribunal at Carcassonne in 1329, he
confessed that over five years he had performed terrible conjurations over wax
images, smeared and sprinkled with blood from a toad and from his own nostrils,
all as sacrifice to the Devil. He then placed the images beneath thresholds of
women he wanted to seduce, and thus he had his way with three women and had
been on the verge of success with others. He had believed that these images held
power to coerce women, or, if the victims were refractory, to bring down upon
them affliction at the hands of demons. On one occasion he pierced one of the
images in its stomach, and blood oozed out.41 Again, an English chaplain named
William Netherstreet was charged in 1377 with using ‘conjurations and
incantations’ to bring a married woman to his chamber at night so he could ‘take
her violently in adultery’. He protested his own innocence.42
In other cases it was non-clerical males who were charged with using
specifically demonic magic for love. At Carcassonne in 1410, Geraud Cassendi,
a notary, was tried by an inquisitor for invoking demons as a means for
debauching women and girls. He was said to have placed on his shirt gold
scrapings from an image of the Virgin. Then he invoked demons with
conjurations read from a book, but when a swarm of evil spirits actually
appeared, a witness to the rite was so terror-struck that he hurled a shoe at them
and bade them withdraw, which they did. On another occasion as well Cassendi
is supposed to have gone into the woods and invoked demons.43 And when the
inquisitor Piero di ser Lippo wrote to the government of Siena in 1382 about
magicians in the village of Rugomagno, he reported that one Agnolo di Corso
had worshipped and invoked Satan and Beelzebub, and had invoked demons to
kill people and to compel men to go to women.44
To be sure, there are cases in which women, too, were said to use specifically
demonic magic for erotic effect. In 1324 Alice Kyteler was charged with using
‘the intestines and innards of cocks sacrificed … to demons’, with other


--- PAGE 103 ---
materials, partly for erotic magic,45 and a woman tried by Heinrich Kramer at
Innsbruck in 1485 was said to have instructed others in the art of invoking the
devil to arouse love or illness.46 In these cases it seems less clear that the
demonic element was explicit, that the women were in fact making use of
necromantic techniques, and that their magic was marked with the same degree
of ritual complexity as can be seen in the clerical practice of erotic necromancy.
What is perhaps more likely is that women’s natural magic was being interpreted
as if it were similar to the demonic magic more often practiced by clerics and at
times by other men.
An erotic experiment in the Munich handbook
Our necromantic manual in Clm 849 includes four experiments said to induce
love – one may assume sexual compliance is the main intent – and at least three
of them are complex rituals analogous to the erotic necromancy seen in the
judicial records. The first of these experiments (no. 3) is in one sense the least
violent: rather than inflicting physical harm on the woman’s image, the master
afflicts it with a kind of spiritual harm by inscribing on it the names of demons
which are to afflict her. In any case, the writer has no scruples at all about
bringing severe psychological pressure to bear in his magical seduction:
When you wish to have the love of whatever woman you wish, whether she is
near or far, whether noble or common, on whatever day or night you wish,
whether for the furtherance of friendship or to its hindrance, first you must
have a totally white dove and a parchment made from a female dog that is in
heat, from whom it is most easily to be had [de qua est habere leuissimum].
And you should know that this kind of parchment is most powerful for
gaining the love of a woman. You should also have a quill from an eagle. In a
secret place, take the dove and with your teeth bite into it near the heart,47 so
that the heart comes out, and with the eagle’s quill write on the parchment
with the [dove’s] blood the name of her whom you wish, and draw the image
of a naked woman as best you can, saying, ‘I draw so-and-so, N., daughter of
so-and-so, whom I wish to have, in the name of these six hot spirits, namely
Tubal, Satan, Reuces, Cupido, Afalion, Duliatus, that she may love me above
all others living in this world.’
When you have done this, write on the forehead her name and the name
‘Tubal’, saying, ‘You are so-and-so, daughter of so-and-so, from now on


--- PAGE 104 ---
disposed to my will, and you are Tubal [inscribed] on her forehead. I
command you to remain, binding the senses of her head and causing her to
love me alone.’
Then write on her right arm ‘Satan’, and on her left arm ‘Reuces’. When
these [names] have been written, say, ‘As you, Satan, and you, Reuces, are
inscribed on this image made in the name of so-and-so, may you so afflict her
arms without delay, so that she can do nothing but desire to embrace me.’
When you have this, write your own name near the heart of the image,
saying, ‘As I am on the heart of this image, may so-and-so, N., thus have me
in her heart day and night.’
When you have done this, write on the genitals of the image the name
‘Cupid’, saying, ‘As you, Cupid, are on the genitals of this image, may you
thus remain always on the genitals of so-and-so, arousing her so that she
despises all men of this world and desires me alone, and may the fire of love
for me torment and inflame her.’
When you have done this, write on the right leg ‘Afalion’, and on the left
leg ‘Duliatus’. When these have been written, say, ‘As you Afalion, and you
Duliatus, are inscribed on this image, may you sit on the legs of so-and-so,
afflicting her legs with such vehement love for me that she has no wish or
desire to go anywhere but here.’
When you have said this, take the image with both hands, kneel, and say,
‘I have drawn the heart and mind of so-and-so with this image, and with
powerful invocation I arouse her to love, desire, and yearn for me, and to
have me in mind all night in her sleep, through Our Lord Jesus Christ, who
lives and reigns and commands forever.’
When you have said this, take myrrh and saffron, kindle a fire, and
fumigate the image, saying this conjuration: ‘I conjure all you demons
inscribed on this image, by your lords to whom you are bound in obedience –
Sobedon, Badalam and Berith – that you should inflame so-and-so, whose
image is designed in this name, to love of me, so that day and night she may
think of me, [and] may hope for me, until she fulfils my will with ardor [cum
affectu]. And as you are inscribed and fixed on this image, may you thus
dwell in her until I do with her whatever I wish.’
When you have said this conjuration three times, and made the fumigation,
take a hair from the tail of a horse and suspend the parchment with this hair,
so that it moves in the air, and let it hang. On that day, or the next, or some
other, or whenever you can, go to that woman, and without doubt she will be


--- PAGE 105 ---
very glad to see you, and will say she cannot live without you. And this will
occur immediately, and she will do your heart’s desire, and will love you
above all things for all eternity.
If you keep this image formed in her name, in which there is such power,
you will obtain from it, more wondrous yet, this sign: before you have seen
her, as soon as this image is made, when you proceed toward her she will be
so enamoured [ filocapta] of you that when she sees you, you will not
withdraw from her company deprived, but rather you will attain satisfaction
in whatever you desire. If you cannot approach her, whether from fear or
because of distance or any other obstacle, you can still have her brought by
the aforesaid demons, who are so effective that if you were in the east, within
an hour they could carry her without danger from the west, and likewise they
could return her, without exposure.
The image having been made as has been said, and suspended on a
particular day, at any hour of the day, you may blow on it so that it moves
with your breath, and likewise on the second and third day. On the night of
the third day, or on the day itself, either alone or with three faithful
companions, take the image and hang it around your neck with the [horse’s]
hair, and have it lie on your chest. And take a sword and make with it a circle
on the ground. When you have made the circle, stand inside it and summon
your companions (if you have any), who should do nothing but stand in the
circle and watch the spectacle [ludum] – but it is better if you do not have
them. Take an iron stylus and trace [a band with names in it] round the circle,
as is shown here, preserving constant silence.
The circle is shown as a single band containing the names Rator, Lampoy,
Despan, Brunlo, Dronoth, Maloqui, Satola, Gelbid, Mascifin, Nartim and
Lodoni. The centre of the circle is labelled ‘Place of the Master’.
When you have done so, say this conjuration: ‘I conjure you demons
inscribed in this circle, to whom is given the power and capacity to seduce
and bind in the love of men, by the virtue and power of the divine majesty;
and by the thrones and dominations and powers and principalities of Him
who spoke and they were made; and by those who ceaselessly cry with one
voice, “Holy, holy, holy …”; and by these names which cause you terror,
namely Rator, Lampoy, [etc.]; and by this ring that is here; and by the
innumerable powers belonging to you and your superiors, that wherever you


--- PAGE 106 ---
are, you should rise up from your places without delay and go to so-and-so,
and immediately, without deception lead her here, and take her back when I
wish. And let no one be aware of this or take account of it.’
When you have said this three times, gazing at a ring, you will hear a
voice, saying, ‘Behold, we are here!’ Immediately you will see six handsome
and gentle young men, saying to you with one voice, ‘We are here, ready and
willing to obey your command. Tell us what you wish, and at once we will do
it.’ You should say, ‘Go to so-and-so and bring her to me without delay.’
When you have said this, they will at once depart, and within an hour they
will bring her without harm.
You should know that none of these [six] can enter the circle, but they will
ring her to it and she will stretch out her hand to you, and you will draw her
in. She will be a bit astonished, but quite willing to remain with you. I should
inform you that it is better to make the circle as large as possible, because in it
you can make a circle [sic], and in it you can stretch out more effectively. For
if anything of yours [any part of your body?] should go outside the circle, it
would be bad for you. When the woman has come, all the spirits will vanish.
You can keep the woman in the circle as long as you please. For when the
woman has entered the circle, you should say to the spirits, ‘Let one of you
go to the place from which you brought so-and-so and remain there in [her]
form while I have her here.’ When you have said this, they will all depart in
silence. On the day or night and month and year when it pleases you to have
her return home, say, ‘O you spirits, who brought so-and-so here, take her and
carry her to her home. And whenever I wish her back, be compliant in
carrying her here. Go, therefore, by the wondrous powers which you ineffably
exercise.’ When you have said this three times, five spirits will come and
carry her off in your sight.
When she enters the circle and you greet her, remember to touch her with
the image that you have around your neck, and on this account she will love
you for all eternity and will not care to see anyone but you. While you are
with the woman, the image which you should keep around your neck will
always be invisible to the woman herself, and when she leaves you should
take it from your neck and lay it aside carefully in some sort of vessel. When
it is thus laid aside, erase the entire circle, and you may depart safely. And
when you wish to have [her] again come to you, do as is said above.
And note that this experiment is most effective and is not at all dangerous.
By this experiment alone, Solomon had whatever women he wished. And let


--- PAGE 107 ---
this suffice on the subject of obtaining women. And it should be carried out
with the greatest solemnity.
This experiment contains conjurations, but they play a less prominent role than
the auxiliary magical techniques, especially the use of an image for sympathetic
magic. The sympathetic identification of the image with the woman portrayed is
accomplished solely through assignation of her name: the writer does not
emphasize that the image should be in any way realistic (e.g., that it should have
some specific feature in common with the prototype), nor does he advise that the
image be baptized in the woman’s name. The suspension of the image to be
blown about freely in the air is reminiscent of a type of aeromancy catalogued by
Johannes Hartlieb, involving the suspension of a wax image or atzman, left to
blow in the wind so that the person in whose name it is prepared will thereby be
afflicted.48 The blood of a dove must be used here – and a dove must be offered
as sacrifice in the amatory experiment from the Liber de angelis given above –
presumably because the dove is traditionally associated with Venus.49
The experiment contains an elaborate contingency procedure, used to fetch
the woman, which differs markedly from the original sympathetic magic. The
woman’s image is still used: the experimenter wears it around his neck, although
it is invisible to her; as she leaves the circle he touches her with it, and from then
on she will love only him; when she departs, he should take it off and keep it
safe in a vessel. For immediate purposes at hand, however, the image becomes
less significant and the role of the demons becomes proportionally greater. It is
the demons who fetch the woman in response to a conjuration, and it is a demon
who takes the woman’s place and prevents others from noting her absence.
When the magician orders one of the spirits to go and take the woman’s place
and assume her form while she is absent, we have an element of illusionist
magic embedded in an experiment designed mainly for psychological effect.
Both the problem and the solution are obvious enough that it is not surprising to
find parallels in other cultures. Thus, Krishna is said to have used his powers of
illusion (ma-ya-) to fashion replicas of his female devotees (the gopi-s), so that
when they went for trysts with him their doubles could lie beside their
husbands.50 The contingency procedure in the Munich experiment differs from
the original formula also in its use of a circle, which is simple in form but
important in its effects, serving both as a location for the conjuration and as a
place for rendezvous with the woman.
The experiment is referred to as a kind of game or spectacle, a ludus, and any


