SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 2/39  |  CHARS: 22839-46651 of 911762
============================================================

; master Jehan de Molesmes, secretary of my lord the duke; Ayme
d’Eschenon, mayor of the town and commune of Dijon; Jehan Rabustel,
procurator of that town; Aimé Barjod, procurator of my lord in the
district of Dijon; and many others – this book was cast into the fire and
totally burned to cinders, to the despite and confusion of the evil enemies
[of the faith], and so that it could never again be used in any manner.20
Here there is no allegation of supernatural phenomena, and the book is not


--- PAGE 18 ---
seen as infected or possessed by demons needing to be exorcized. None the
less, the book itself is treated as if it were a human subject, to be examined
and, once found guilty, executed by burning. Nothing in the account need be
taken as implying that the book itself possesses numinous powers, yet the
book elicits the loathing and the judicial reaction normally reserved for a
personal agent and embodiment of evil. From one perspective there is
nothing unusual about investing a book with personality: the reading of any
book can be perceived as a kind of dialogue between the reader and the text.
Rarely, however, is the perception carried to this extreme.
The numinous quality of a book of magic could resemble that of a
liturgical or devotional book, and in some cases the distinction between a
devotional and a magical work could be obscure. The chronicle of Saint
Denis tells how in 1323 a monk of Morigny was found to possess a book of
devotions inspired by curiosity and pride, although he claimed to have been
inspired rather by visions of the Virgin Mary. In her honour, he had had
many images of the Virgin painted on his pages. He thus sought to renew
the ‘heresy and sorcery’ known as the ars notoria, which involves the use of
special figures, contemplation of these figures amid prayer and fasting, and
invocation of mysterious and presumably demonic names, all for the sake of
knowledge, wealth, honour or pleasure. His own book promised such
rewards, but required invocations, the special copying of the book (at great
expense), and the inscription of one’s name in the book itself two times; the
physical object, in other words, needed to be customized for its user. This
book was so evil, the chronicle declares, that judges at Paris consigned it to
the flames.21 In other cases the boundary between devotion and magic was
complicated by various factors: the combination of devotional and liturgical
material with natural magic;22 the tendency in books of conjuration to
juxtapose formulas for invoking angels, demons and spirits of neutral or
indeterminate standing, and the use of prayers to God for power over
demonic and other spirits. Thus, when the necromantic plot against Benedict
XIII was divulged in 1406, and investigation produced a coffin filled with
books of prayers as well as conjurations, it is impossible to know whether
even the ‘prayers’ were orthodox or deviant.
Tales of sorcerers’ apprentices emphasize that the wondrous powers of a
magical book are not easily controlled: one exemplum tells of a pupil who
reads a chapter from his master’s magical tome and thereby arouses a
tempest which can be quelled only when the master comes back and reads a


--- PAGE 19 ---
chapter equal in length.23 One might say that in such a tale it is not the book
itself but the magic it contains that is powerful and uncontrollable, but the
emphasis on use of a chapter of equal length suggests that the process of
reading may have magical, quantifiable efficacy distinguishable from that of
the specific contents.
The Book of Consecrations
The perception of a book of magic as possessing numinous power is not
merely an obsession of the inquisitors; it is grounded in the writings of the
magicians as well, who guarded the secrecy of their writings perhaps mainly
for fear of detection, but also out of a sense that the books themselves were
sacred objects.
A late medieval book of demonic magic is in at least one respect
decidedly not like a cookbook. If one discovers that the recipes in a
cookbook tend to come out badly, one may reasonably wonder whether
there are errors in detail – whether, for example, the author meant a
teaspoon rather than a tablespoon of salt, or a pinch and not a pound of
nutmeg – but to take the faulty book to a priest and have it blessed would
normally be thought eccentric at best. Yet that, or the rough equivalent, is
indeed what a late medieval necromancer might have done with a defective
book of magic. He might suppose that verbal flaws in the conjurations were
partly to blame,24 but, as we will see, the variants in late medieval
necromantic texts seem to have been so common that a practitioner might
have despaired of ever finding a flawless text to recite. In any case, the
problem of verbal flaws was perhaps not the necromancer’s greatest
concern. A short, anonymous work called the Liber consecrationum (Book
of Consecrations), which circulated in late medieval manuscripts in varying
forms, makes clear that the book itself was a sacred object requiring
elaborate consecration, and that its contents might lose their magical
efficacy.25 According to this Book of Consecrations, the magician must seek
to recover the lost efficacy of his formulas by subjecting the book itself to
an elaborate process of recharging, or reconsecration.
The prologue to this work insists that its proceedings are especially
valuable, being dedicated to the names of God, and should not be used in
vain. By invoking God’s names, the ‘exorcist or operator’ can renew the
power of a magical experiment which has lost its efficacy. Many people


--- PAGE 20 ---
seek to achieve great works, and possess writings by which they will attain
their desire, but they accomplish nothing, because their experiments are
corrupt. The operator must refrain from every pollution of mind and body,
and for nine days must be abstinent in food and drink, must keep from idle
or immoderate words, and must be clothed in clean garments. On each of
these days he must hear mass, carrying this book with him and placing it on
the altar during the mass, which seems to assume the celebrant’s complicity,
if the owner of the book is not in fact himself a cleric. He must execute this
procedure devoutly, with prayer and fasting, so as to attain knowledge of
sacred mysteries, and then he must carry the book back home. He should
have a secret place, sprinkled with holy water, in which he can place the
book, after binding it with a priestly cincture and a stole placed in the form
of a cross. Kneeling toward the east he must say seven psalms (presumably
the seven penitential psalms), ‘the litany’ (meaning the litany of the saints),
and a further prayer before opening the book. Then he may open the book
with humble devotion and with heartfelt desire ‘that God may sanctify and
bless and consecrate this book, devoted to his most sacred names, so that it
may fully obtain the power it should have, that it may have power for
consecrating the bond of spirits and for all invocations and conjurations of
[spirits], and likewise all other experiments’.
These instructions are followed by a prayer, to be said after the litany of
the saints – actually three prayers of varying length. The first is a plea that
God may hear the operator’s prayers despite his unworthiness. The second,
addressed to Christ, repeats this central entreaty, and asks that he may
consecrate this book:
by the power of these your most sacred names, On, Jesus Christ, Alpha
and O, El, Eloy, Eloyye, Sithothith, Eon, Sepmelamaton, Ezelphates,
Tetragramaton, Elyoram, Ryon, Deseryon, Erystion, Ysyornus, Onela,
Baysyn, Moyn, Messias, Sother, Emanuel, Sabaoth, Adonay, and by all
your secret names which are contained in this book, so that by the virtue,
sanctity, and power of these names this book may be consecrated  and
blessed  and confirmed  by the virtue of the sacrament of your body
and blood, so that it may effectively, without any deception, [and] truly
obtain the power that this book should obtain, for consecrating the bond
of spirits, and for consecrating all corrupt experiments, and that they may
have the fulness of virtue and power for which they are ordained,


--- PAGE 21 ---
through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is seated on high, to
whom be honour and glory throughout unending ages. Amen, amen,
amen, amen, amen.
This second prayer then invokes all the heavenly powers to bless the
book. The third and briefest simply calls upon Christ to bless the book.
The procedure is then complete. If the operator later wishes to consecrate
a particular experiment, or add a new one, he should use a series of
further prayers, along with which he must say the Confiteor, take holy
water, and make the sign of the cross on his forehead. At all times he
must take care that this book, which the wise adepts (sapientissimi
phisichi) dedicated to God’s holy names, not fall into the hands of the
foolish. Why this caution might be necessary becomes especially clear
toward the end of the supplementary prayers, in which the ‘exorcist or
operator’ specifically requests power to summon ‘malign spirits’ from
wherever they may happen to be lurking.
The mentality of the necromancers and their opponents
It would be a mistake to think of necromancy as a peripheral phenomenon
in late medieval society and culture. Secular as well as ecclesiastical courts
took it seriously and at times executed those charged with its practice;
monarchs and popes as well as commoners lived in fear of becoming its
victims. This fear may have been in some cases or to some degree feigned
or pathological, but it was also grounded in realistic awareness that
necromancy was in fact being practised, and in an almost universally shared
conviction that it could work.
The history of magic sometimes claims a place in academic study as a
field within intellectual history. This claim is plausible when the subject is a
writer such as al-Kindi or Marsilio Ficino, deeply concerned with the
practical operation of magic but also with the philosophical principles by
which magic worked. This is not the type of material I will chiefly be
examining in this study. The focus here will be formulas of frankly demonic
magic, with only the most meagre of intellectual pretensions; I wish to
suggest, perhaps perversely, that such a text none the less repays close
examination. The rites contained in a manual of necromancy are
flamboyantly transgressive, even carrying transgression toward its furthest


--- PAGE 22 ---
imaginable limits, and in today’s academic environment one might justify
studying them on these grounds. I am impelled more by a simple urge to
grapple with late medieval culture in its entirety, including its most
problematic and conflicted manifestations – warts and all, to use a fitting
cliché – and to explore how the underside of the culture related to the side
more often displayed. This too is part of the historian’s challenge of
discerning how things made sense in an alien culture.
First, then, the surviving necromantic texts provide a useful starting point
for the sources of late medieval magic. Certain aspects of the necromancy
laid out in these writings are clearly derived from the Arabic tradition of
astral magic that became widely diffused in Europe from at least the
thirteenth century onward. At times, as we shall see, the experiments are
indebted to Jewish magical traditions, whether explicitly or implicitly,
although the impact of Jewish magic on the forbidden rites of Christendom
has been less studied and is harder to trace in detail than the influence of
Arabic tradition. There are even materials in late medieval necromantic
manuscripts closely resembling the magic of antiquity. It is often tempting
to suppose that the forms of magical practice are essentially similar across
cultures and throughout time, or at least over a very extended longue durée.
Indeed, one might easily be persuaded that there is a history of the uses of
magic and reactions to magic, but not a history of magic itself: virtually
every magical technique one encounters appears so deeply rooted in
tradition that magical practice seems essentially timeless and perennial.
Indeed, it is possible to cite analogues and possible sources for late
medieval magic from widely diverse cultures; in search of such parallels one
could wander endlessly through thickets of the history of magic, from the
Greek magical papyri of antiquity, through Arabic and Byzantine sources,
and on to the grimoires of the early modern era. Yet when certain more or
less well defined classes of practitioner take an interest in magic, they will
adapt to their own use forms of magic taken from various sources. If the
history of magic is to be anything other than a night in which all cats are
black, it must attend to the characteristics of specific mélanges of magical
tradition. The chief purpose of this study is therefore not to trace the history
of individual elements but to reconstruct the configurations into which these
elements enter: the patterns of magical practice worked in a particular
historical setting, the relationship between these forms of magic and other
aspects of the culture, and the perceptions of magic within that culture.


--- PAGE 23 ---
Furthermore, we cannot understand the opposition to magic in late
medieval Europe without knowing fully what sorts of magic were being
practised in that culture. Apart from the exempla by Caesarius of
Heisterbach and others telling of the dangers of necromancy, there is
considerable literature by late medieval theologians directed against these
practices. For instance, the Paris theologians who in 1398 issued a general
prohibition of magic were clearly aware of necromantic practices and
concerned to eradicate them.26 The theological literature against necromancy
is incomprehensible without knowledge of the necromancers’ formulas, and
has at times been seriously misunderstood.27 Nor can we understand the
virulence of the critics’ assault on magic without knowing the purposes
magic was believed to serve. The glorification of the transgressive and the
vilification of persecutors has perhaps too often blinded us to the
recognition that much magic was intended for sexual coercion and
exploitation, or for unscrupulous careerism, or for vigilante action against
thieves that could easily lead to false accusations. I do not propose to
moralize about these activities, but as a corrective to naive romanticizing I
do want to make clear the kinds of magic one can expect to find in a late
medieval source. It would be too much to claim that fear of clerical
necromancy was a major source of pre-Reformation anti-clericalism – in
Boccaccio, for example, when clerics make pretence of magical power this
is exercised in the service of their lechery, and lust rather than magic is the
focus of the satire – but the realization that certain clerics were dabbling in
conjuration could hardly have made a positive contribution to the image of
the clergy at a time when for other reasons there was increasing distrust of
priests and priestcraft.28
If we neglect the literature of necromancy we cannot grasp what it is that
the Humanist mages (Marsilio Ficino, Giovanni Pico, Johannes Reuchlin,
Johannes Trithemius and others) so vigorously claimed not to be doing, or
what they were often suspected of doing despite their protestations. Even
the rise of the witch trials in the fifteenth century is related to increasing
consciousness of this explicitly demonic magic. It was surely in large part
because they were aware of the demonic magic described in these manuals
and evidently practised in their midst that orthodox authorities often became
sceptical about the notion of non-demonic, natural magic. They seem to
have misconstrued ordinary magical procedures, interpreting them as
working, like necromancy, through demonic agency.29 Cesare Lanza hinted


--- PAGE 24 ---
at the connection when he remarked in 1579, ‘Today a lowly little woman
does more than all the necromancers accomplished in the ancient world.’30
In so far as necromancers contributed to the plausibility of claims about
witches, they bear indirect responsibility for the rise of the European witch
trials in the fifteenth and following centuries. To the extent that these early
witch trials focused on female victims, they thus provide a particularly
tragic case of women being blamed and punished for the misconduct of
men: women who were not invoking demons could more easily be thought
to do so at a time when certain men were in fact so doing.
Natural magic was always, in some quarters, a suspect category, and
understandably so: its mechanisms remained unclear, and its claims to
empirical confirmation were perhaps even by medieval standards not
impressive. Demonic magic, in contrast, was a straightforward notion, and
its efficacy was easy for virtually all medieval people to believe. Small
wonder if for some authorities in late medieval Europe this became the
paradigmatic form of magic, and if other forms came to be interpreted as
implicitly grounded in demonic aid, so that a theologian, an inquisitor, or an
educated lay judge might be sceptical about claims that some magic was
natural rather than demonic.
More generally, knowledge of this material adds significantly to our
understanding of later medieval clerical culture. A society that had a surplus
of clergy inevitably spawned an underemployed and largely unsupervised
‘clerical underworld’ capable of various forms of mischief, including
necromancy, and indeed this underworld seems to have been the primary
locus for this explicitly demonic magic. Not all those accused of conjuring
demons were clerics; the charge was attached at times to laymen and
occasionally women.31 But the examples cited already suggest that clerics
were disproportionally represented, and when we examine the Munich
handbook of necromancy in following chapters what we will find there is a
characteristically clerical form of magic, using Latin texts and presupposing
knowledge of mainstream ritual.32 The beliefs and ritual operations found in
necromancy mimic those of established rites, somewhat as the threads are
the same on both sides of a tapestry, and the patterns they form on the
underside are recognizably related to those on the front. One might even
suggest that a culture in which ritual occupies so central a place will
naturally if not inevitably engender forbidden rituals, somewhat as the
production of a tapestry necessarily produces on the underside a distorted


--- PAGE 25 ---
version of the intended image. The study of late medieval necromancy gives
an exceptionally clear and forceful picture of the abuses likely to arise in a
culture so keenly attentive to ritual display of sacerdotal power. Our own
society, more fascinated with sexuality and its abuse, has its own concerns
about miscreant priests and their abuse of young boys; the clerical
misconduct most feared in the late Middle Ages was of a different order.
Demonic magic and the theory of ritual
I have spoken of demonic magic as the underside of the tapestry of late
medieval ritual culture; more must be said about the character of magic as
ritual. If the book of magic is on the one hand a magical book, an object
possessing preternatural power, a habitation in which demons may even be
supposed to reside, it is on the other hand a script whose formulas are meant
for enactment, a guide for ritual action. The book of magic thus functions
both as a repository of magical power and as a guide to magical process, a
liturgical compendium with rites to be observed, scripts to be enacted. The
rites of magic suggest questions analogous to those raised by any rites, even
if they differ in the sources of power they mean to exploit. Three issues in
the study of ritual are of particular relevance to our understanding of a
necromantic text: the relationship between official (or public) and unofficial
(or private) ritual; the efficacy ascribed to ritual, and the role of language in
ritual.
Émile Durkheim and Marcel Mauss took the chief difference between
religion and magic to lie in their social context. To paraphrase their
perception, religion is the official observance of a collectivity (such as a
Church), while magic is the unofficial practice of an individual (often on
behalf of a client). But if one takes religion to be the spiritual practice of a
community specifically acting as a community, one excludes private prayer
– while if one takes it to be the spiritual practice sanctioned by a
community, even when carried out individually, one relegates any and all
disapproved practice, regardless of the grounds for disapproval, to the
category of magic.35 Eamon Duffy has emphasized that magical or
superstitious formulas in charms share a common vocabularity with
liturgical prayers, which already suggests the need for a nuanced sense of
the relationship between religion and magic. The complexity of this
relationship may be seen with particular clarity in the comparison of


--- PAGE 26 ---
exorcism and conjuration. As we shall see in a later chapter, in medieval
parlance these terms were used interchangeably, and the practices are in fact
in all ways but one identical. What we now call exorcism was practised by
an individual, usually a cleric (although some laypeople claimed the role),
who addressed demons with formal commands, whose power was derived
chiefly from the sacred realities invoked in the formulas of command. What
we now call conjuring was also practised by an individual, usually a cleric,
who addressed demons with formal commands essentially identical to those
of the exorcists, again powerful by virtue of appeal to sacred realities. In
neither case was the command automatically efficacious: both exorcists and
conjurers reckoned on the possibility that the demons might resist their
invocations and refuse compliance, in which case the rituals of command
would be redoubled. Both the exorcist and the conjurer were engaged in
spiritual wrestling matches with the demons, and in both cases they were
keenly aware of the dangers. Exorcism was in principle carried out on
behalf of a demoniac; conjurations could be done as ways of afflicting
enemies, and could be carried out on behalf of clients. In both cases, then,
the ritual performer was acting as an individual but within a social context.
If exorcisms were allowed, at least to authorized clergy, while conjuring was
prohibited to all, it was because of the one key difference: the exorcist’s
intent was to dispel the demons, while the conjurer’s was to summon them,
and mainstream opinion held that it was better to be rid of malign spirits
than to invite them into one’s life. Study of conjurations in subsequent
chapters will suggest that there is no other essential difference between this
form of magic and religious practices, and that it is better to perceive
demonic magic as an illicit form of religion than as a cultural phenomenon
distinct from religion.
The efficacy of magical rites, like that of any rituals, can be seen as real,
objective, and (within the historical culture) rational, or as emotional,
subjective, and symbolic: the magicians’ operations may be viewed as
actually accomplishing certain ends, or as symbolic expressions of their
emotions and their desires. In Ludwig Wittgenstein’s classic formulation,
‘Magic … gives manifestation to a wish; it expresses a wish.’36 Echoing
such earlier formulations, Joseph Gusfield suggests that ‘in symbolic
behavior the action is ritualistic and ceremonial in that the goal is reached in
the behaviour itself rather than in any state it brings about’.37 This
pragmatist perception of ritual may be useful as a way for an observer to


