SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 23/39  |  CHARS: 525417-548502 of 911762
============================================================

experiments specify that their
operations, or certain of them, should be done under specified astrological
conditions, which most often entail phases of the moon: the work should be done
under a waxing or waning moon, or in a particular phase of the moon. The day
of the week is sometimes specified. The time of the day may be indicated: the
first hour, before sunrise, morning or noon. Thus, an erotic experiment (no. 12)
must be initiated in the hour of Venus or the hour of Jove, not simply because of


--- PAGE 213 ---
the obvious erotic associations of Venus, but because Venus and Jupiter were
seen as ‘favourable’ planets. At times the manual says that operations should be
carried out under a clear sky. Astrological specifications of slightly greater
sophistication occur only rarely: an experiment is to be carried out under a
conjunction of Venus and Jupiter, or when the Sun is in Leo.21
Fumigations (or suffumigations) occur in eight of the manual’s experiments.
In psychological experiments it is the image or the object sympathetically
representing the victim that is fumigated: with myrrh and saffron (no. 3); with
cinnamon, pepper and agrimonia (no. 4), or with sulphur fumes (no. 5). In
illusionist experiments it is the circle that is thus treated: with the marrow of a
dead person (no. 8), or with incense and myrrh (no. 11). An all-purpose
experiment (no. 36) likewise instructs the master to place incense and myrrh in a
thurible (presumably of gold) and walk around the outer edge of the circle,
saying, ‘I make this fumigation in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit.’ Both versions of the Mirror of Floron require that the mirror
itself be fumigated.
The portion of the manual most fully reflecting the influence of Arabic astral
magic is the compendium devoted specifically to the subject (no. 37). This
section of the manuscript, which is deeply indebted to works such as Picatrix
and other manuals of astral magic,22 contains two types of material: integrated
instructions for magical rites utilizing the powers of the heavenly bodies, and
lists of supplementary information regarding each day of the week (the seals to
be used, the names of angels and other spirits who rule and serve on each day,
suffumigations to be employed) and each hour of the day and night (the name
and function of each, names of angels that rule each hour, images to be used for
each hour, and so forth).23 The latter form of material can perhaps best be
conveyed in tabular form (see Tables E–G), even if some nuance is lost in this
presentation. Those subsections which give integrated instructions for rites are,
in particular, no. 37a (conjurations for each day of the week), nos 37m and 37n
(uses of images for each day and night hour), and no. 37q (uses of images and
conjurations for each day of the week).
Two examples (one from no. 37m, the other from no. 37q) will illustrate how
the integrated experiments draw upon the schemata found in the mere lists:
During the fifth day hour one should make an image to tame wild beasts, such
as lions, bears, wolves, and any other wild and harmful beasts. At this hour
cast an image of the animal of the sort you wish to control or tame, and on the


--- PAGE 214 ---
head of the image carve the name of the animal, and on the chest the name of
the hour and the name of the lord of the hour, and on the stomach the seven
names of the first hour, and fumigate the image with Indian wood and with
red sandalwood, and bury the image in a place of your choosing, and with the
Lord’s help aiding you, you will see that all those animals will be turned to
your will.
Somewhat more elaborate is a procedure for bringing concord between humans:
The fifth image is that of Thursday, and the angels constituted over it are
Satquiel, Pattar, Constiel, [and] Assassayel, and these are the winds
constituted over the image: Silite, Maraben, Halharit, and their helpers are
Yse, Riron, Naasay, [and] Eladab. And when you wish to perform this work,
make an image of yellow bronze or of yellow wax on a Thursday, and tint it
with green, and make it for a man [or] for a woman, if you wish thereby to
bring friendship between two men or women, or between a man and a
woman. Make two images of green wax in the month of May, at the height of
Pisces, or in the month of January in the height of Sagittarius, and write the
name of the man on the heart of the woman’s image, and the name of the
woman on the heart of the male, and say this conjuration:
‘O Lord God, almighty creator of [all] things, visible and invisible,
establish gentle concord between thus-and-such woman, daughter of so-and-
so, and so-and-so, son of so-and-so, such as you established between Adam
and Eve, and between Jacob and Rachel, and between Michael and Gabriel
(one of whom is fiery and the other watery, [yet] the one does not harm the
other, but there is great concord between them), and such concord as you
established between the angel whose medium is fire and the one whose
medium is snow, so that the snow does not extinguish the fire, nor does the
fire consume the snow, and so you likewise turn envy into concord. Thus, O
Lord, by your most holy kindness and mercy, may you cause so-and-so,
daughter of so-and-so, to accord with, to love, and to cherish so-and-so, son
of so-and-so. I conjure you angels by the name Yafaa, Safaa, Alleya, Hayala,
Haya, Halix, Hayul, Ataya, Hytoia, Saffetaba, Coffossol, Remlestar, El, Lord
God, you who know the secrets of [all] hearts and are the end and the
beginning, [and] who never die. Hasten, Sarafem [and] Custyeli, and
command Amaris and his helpers, that they may quickly carry out and
accomplish my request.’


--- PAGE 215 ---
And bury the image in a place by which they pass, and you will see the
marvels of almighty God.
No. 37a consists chiefly of conjurations for the days of the week; the
conjurations differ in two main ways from those found in the main block of
material: their purpose is left unspecified, there being no explicit instruction to
the spirits conjured; and they involve word play and near repetition of a sort
often associated with Kabbalah: ‘In the name Adonay, Adonay, Eye, Eye, Eyu
… Eye, Aloraye; in the name Sadaye, Saday, Cados, Cados, Cados, the high one,
sitting upon the cherubim …’; ‘In the name Adonay, Adonay, Adonay, Eye, Eye,
Eye, Cados, Cados, Cados, Hatyn, Hatyn, Hatyn, Va, Va, strong one, Va, who
appeared on Mount Sinai with glorification of his reign, Ya, Adonay, Saday,
Sabaoth, Hanath, Hu, Haxi, Ya, Ya, Ya, Marmalita, Abym, Yea …’; and ‘by the
name Ya, Ya, Ya, A, A, Va, Hy, Hy, Haa, Haai, Va, Va, Han, Han, Hon, Hy,
Hyen, Haya, Haya, Hol, Hol, Hay, Hael, Hon; by the names of the Lord Adonay,
Haya, Hol, creator of the ages, Cados, Cados, Cados, Ebel, El, Ya, Ya, Ya, Eloy,
Arar, Eloym, Eloym …’
Elements of simple lunar astrology, too, are found toward the end of the
compilation, in a listing of what were called lunationes, or days of the lunar
cycle that are good or bad for making magical inscriptions (no. 46). In general,
lunar astrology lent itself more to popular use than did the more technical
science of solar astrology; while it is found in varying degrees of complexity, it
could easily be reduced to a simple list of days in the lunar cycle, identified as
favourable or unfavourable, whether in general or for a particular operation such
as the working of magic.24
When all is said and done, however, the use of astrology and astral magic in
the Munich handbook – and probably in other, similar necromantic texts – is
fairly superficial. One does not find detailed or rationalized efforts to exploit the
powers of celestial bodies, and even the concise treatise of astral magic is more a
catalogue than a fully developed work, presumably included simply because the
compiler was highly eclectic, but not genuinely integrated into the drift of the
compilation as a whole.
The Speculum astronomiae, probably written by Albert the Great, explains
the basic principles of astrology, then touches at the end on necromancy and
related arts. The author says he does not mean to speak in favour of astrological
images, because of their similarity to necromantic (necromanticas) ones. He then
goes on to say that necromantic books should be set aside without being


--- PAGE 216 ---
destroyed, ‘For perhaps the time is already at hand, when, for certain reasons
about which I am now silent, it will be useful on occasion to have inspected
them, but, nevertheless, their inspectors should be wary of using them.’25 Coy as
it is, this statement makes clear that the boundary between astral magic and
necromancy was fluid in practice even if in theory it could be stated with clarity:
astral magic invoked the natural powers of the stars and planets, while
necromancy called upon demons; but if there were spirits associated with the
heavenly bodies, these might be difficult to distinguish from the spirits of the air
traditionally conceived as demonic.26 One can well understand why orthodox
authorities and writers would be suspicious of that which even bordered on the
forbidden. The works translated from the Arabic might include a great deal of
material that was straightforwardly astrological and clearly non-demonic, but a
work such as Picatrix appealed to both the powers of the planets and those of
spirits, and identified its art as that of necromancy. The Munich handbook is
important in part because it extends the spectrum to the furthest extreme, giving
us nearly in its entirety a work expressly devoted to demonic magic, worked out
in considerable detail and for the most part with only token borrowing from the
astral magic with which necromancy was so richly intertwined.
Table E. Specifications for each day of the week


--- PAGE 218 ---
Table F. Specifications for day hours
Table G. Specifications for night hours


--- PAGE 219 ---
Notes
1 Siegfried Wenzel, ed. and trans., Fasciculus morum: A Fourteenth-Century Preacher’s Handbook
(University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1989), v. 30, pp. 578–79.
2 Guillaume de Deguileville, The Pilgrimage of the Life of Man, Englisht by John Lydgate, A.D. 1426,
from the French of Guillaume de Deguileville, A.D. 1330, 1355, ed. F.J. Furnivall (London: K. Paul, Trench,
Trübner, 1899–1904), vol. 2, pp. 493–505, lines 18,471–924. See Richard Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle
Ages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), 172–3, where the drawing of the meeting with the
necromancer is reproduced.
3 M.R. James, ‘Twelve medieval ghost-stories’, English Historical Review, 37 (1922), 416f.
4 Hansen, Quellen, 556–9; Bibliothèque de l’Ecole des Chartes, ser. 2, vol. 3 (1846).
5 A classic Byzantine treatise on magic instructed its reader to make two concentric circles wide enough


--- PAGE 220 ---
to accommodate two people; they should be drawn inside a square, with an entrance corridor to the south,
and various words and signs are to be inscribed. See Richard P.H. Greenfield, Traditions of Belief in Late
Byzantine Demonology (Amsterdam: Hakkert, 1988), 286–7.
6 The Sworn Book of Honourius [sic] the Magician, as Composed by Honourius through Counsel with
the Angel Hocroell, ed. and trans. Daniel J. Driscoll (Gillette, NJ: Heptangle, 1983), chs 26 and 38.
7 De Nigromancia of Roger Bacon, ii.4–6, ed. and trans. Michael-Albion Macdonald (Gillette, NJ:
Heptangle, 1988), 13–26. On the legend of St Cyprian of Antioch see Butler’s Lives of the Saints, ed.
Herbert Thurston and Donald Attwater (New York: Kenedy, 1956), under 26 September.
8 De Nigromancia., iii.1, 28f.
9 Ibid., 51.
10 Rawl. 29r, 73r, 77v–78r, 79r, 103v, 104v.
11 One (nos 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 12, 15), two (nos 7, 10, 16, 18, 22), three (nos 36, two in 39, 40), or four (no.
6).
12 For parallels and possible sources in Arabic culture see H.A. Winkler, Siegel und Charaktere in der
muhammedanischen Zauberei (Berlin and Leipzig: de Gruyter, 1930).
13 E.g., Greenfield, Traditions of Belief, 286.
14 Caesarius of Heisterbach, The Dialogue on Miracles, trans. H. von E. Scott and C.C. Swinton Bland,
vol. 1 (London: Routledge, 1929), 315–17. See also Stith Thompson, Motif-Index of Folk-Literature: A
Classification of Narrative Elements in Folktales, Ballads, Myths, Fables, Mediaeval Romances, Exempla,
Fabliaux, Jest-Books, and Local Legends, rev. edn (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1955–58), nos.
D1272 (magic circle), D1381.11 (magic circle protects from devil) and G303.16.19.15 (devil cannot enter
magic circle made to keep him out); and Frederic C. Tubach, Index exemplorum: A Handbook of Medieval
Religious Tales (FF Communications, 204) (Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, Akademia Scientiarum
Fennica, 1969), p. 86, nos. 1,069–71.
15 Bodleian Library, Oxford, Rawlinson MS 252, fols 25v, 59v–61v.
16 Cornelius Agrippa, Of Occult Philosophy, Book Four: Magical Ceremonies, ed. and trans. Robert
Turner (Gillette, NJ: Heptangle, 1985), 72.
17 Taanith, 3.8, in C.K. Barrett, New Testament Background: Selected Documents (London: SPCK,
1956; rev. edn 1987), pp. 191–2; and Hans Dieter Betz, ed., The Greek Magical Papyri in Translation,
Including the Demotic Spells, 1 (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1986), 141 (PGM VII.846–61), 73
(IV.2006–2125).
18 Fols 112v–113v, 142r–142v: magister facit circulum cum cutello, et faciat socium suum intus sedere,
et precipiat sibi magister quod nec pedes neque manus nec vestes nec capillos foras extendat, donec
magister exeat expeditus ab omnibus ordinatis…. Postea faciat circulum cum cultello suo, et assignat locum
in quo socius suus sedere debeat. Postea iubet eum sedere, et ostendit ei sub qua forma sedere debeat in
circulo, et qualiter se regere in omnibus debeat, et qualiter spiritum in aduentu suo recipere debeat, et
quomodo exire debeat de circulo, et qualiter in recessu suo eum licenciare tenetur, et quomodo exire debeat
de circulo, et quo debeat se diuertere. Et hec omnia debet magister socio suo ostendere antequam eum in
circulo incurrere permittit, ne ex defectu periculum intrare videatur.
19 See Richard Kieckhefer, Magic in the Middle Ages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989),
131–3.
20 See Hilary M. Carey, Courting Disaster: Astrology at the English Court and University in the Later
Middle Ages (New York: St Martin’s Press, 1992), ch. 8, from which the translation is taken.
21 Nos 4, 6, 8, 11, 19, 41 (waxing moon); 2, 5 (waning moon); 7 [?] (first phase of the moon); 9 (sixth
phase); 20 (other phases); 4, 41 (Sunday), 9 (Tuesday), 11 (Wednesday), 6 (Thursday or Sunday), 2, 5
(Saturday); 4, 11 (first hour); 5 (before sunrise); 41 (morning [de mane]); 6 (noon); 7, 8 (clear sky); 20


--- PAGE 221 ---
(conjunction of Venus and Jupiter); 41 (Sun in Leo); 5 (under a waning moon et maxime quando est in
combustione).
22 Picatrix: The Latin Version of the Gha-yat Al-Haki-m, ed. David Pingree (London: Warburg Institute,
1986), esp. passages such as those on pp. 15–22 (images to effect peace, love, the favour of a lore, etc.); pp.
68–73 (images of planets), and 200–2 (fumigations for various planets); for further examples see ‘Thabit
ibn Qurra’s De imaginibus’, in Francis J. Carmody, The Astronomical Works of Thabit b. Qurra (Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1960), 180–97. See Lynn Thorndike, ‘Traditional medieval tracts concerning
engraved astrological images’, in Mélanges Auguste Pelzer: Etudes d’histoire littéraire et doctrinale de la
Scolastique médiévale offertes à Monseigneur Auguste Pelzer (Louvain: Bibliothèque de l’Université,
1947), 217–73.
23 Nos 37a (conjurations for days of week), 37b (signs of angels), 37c (signs of days), 37d (angels
ruling days), 37e (spirits ruling days), 37f (fumigations for days), 37g (purposes served each day), 37h
(angels of days), 37i (names of God), 37j (names and functions of day hours), 37k (names and functions of
night hours), 37l (names and functions of hourly angels), 37m (images for day hours), 37n (images for night
hours), 37o (angels of times), 37p (names of planets and parts of Earth), 37q (images and conjurations for
days) and 37r (summary). The association of angels and demons with specific days and hours had been
worked out in Byzantine sources; see Armand Delatte, Anecdota Atheniensia, 1 (Liège: Bibliothèque de la
Faculté de Philosophie et Lettres de l’Université de Liège, 1927), 403–4, 434–8. For material similar to that
in no. 37j, see Charles Burnett, Magic and Divination in the Middle Ages: Texts and Techniques in the
Islamic and Christian Worlds (Aldershot: Variorum, 1996), IX, p. 2.
24 On the tradition from which this text draws see Ute Müller, Deutsche Mondwahrsagetexte aus dem
Spätmittelalter (diss. Berlin: Freie Universität Berlin, 1971); The Works of John Metham, including The
Romance of Amoryus and Cleopes, ed. Hardin Craig (EETS, o.s. 132) (London: Kegan Paul, Trench,
Trübner, 1916), xxxviii–xlii (a survey of the genre), 148–56; L. Braswell, ‘Popular lunar astrology in the
late Middle Ages’, University of Ottawa Quarterly, 48 (1978), 187–94.; Robert Vian, ed., Ein
Mondwahrsagebuch: Zwei altdeutsche Handschriften des XIV. und XV. Jahrhunderts (Halle, 1910); and
Frank Fürbeth, Johannes Hartlieb: Untersuchungen zu Leben und Werk (Tübingen: Niemeyer, 1992), 49–
57. W. Braekman, ‘Magische experimenten en toverpraktijken uit een middelnederlands handschrift’,
Verslagen en mededelingen van de Koninklijke Vlaamse Academie voor Taal- en Letterkunde, 1966, 54–68,
gives the first six sections of a moon-book for when the moon is in each zodiacal sign.
25 Paola Zambelli, The ‘Speculum astronomiae’ and its Enigmas: Astrology, Theology and Science in
Albertus Magnus and His Contemporaries (Dordrecht, Boston, and London: Kluwer, 1992), chs 16–17, pp.
270–73.
26 On this issue see especially D.P. Walker, Spiritual and Demonic Magic, from Ficino to Campanella
(London: Warburg Institute, 1958; repr. Notre Dame, ID: University of Notre Dame Press, 1975).


--- PAGE 222 ---
S
9
Conclusion
ome time around the 1530s, Benvenuto Cellini witnessed the conjuring of
demons in the Colosseum at Rome – or at least so he reports in his
autobiography.1 He had met a Sicilian priest who knew Latin and Greek,
and who agreed to introduce him to the art of necromancy. Along with two
companions they went to the Colosseum, traced circles on the ground, and
undertook ‘the finest ceremonies that can be imagined’, amid various
suffumigations and an hour and a half of conjurations. When legions of demons
filled the Colosseum, the priest urged Cellini to make some inquiry, and he asked
them to restore to him his Sicilian girlfriend, Angelica, to which they made no
reply. Cellini and the priest went to the Colosseum a second time, with a twelve-
year-old boy and two other companions. In Hebrew and Greek as well as Latin,
the necromancer conjured multitudinous demons by name, invoking the power
of God, and there appeared a hundred times as many spirits as previously. Cellini
repeated his request, and the spirits promised that within a month he would be
together with Angelica. But the ceremony was soon out of control: the
necromancer declared that the demons were a thousand times more than he had
conjured, and they were the most dangerous of spirits; the boy shrieked that a
million threatening figures were swarming around them, while four ‘giants’ were
endeavouring to break into the circle. Eventually, however, the numbers of
spirits dwindled, so that by the time the conjurers left their circle the boy
reported there were only two demons left, skipping along the road or on the
rooftops. The necromancer insisted that he had never before encountered such a
ferocious display of demons. The experience did not dissuade him, however,
from urging Cellini to join him in another ritual, the consecration of a book by
which they could discover buried treasure. Cellini agreed, but was soon so
preoccupied with his work that he abandoned both this new project and his
hopes regarding Angelica.
E.M. Butler inclined to accept Cellini’s story essentially at face value,
although she noted that only the boy seems actually to have seen the conjured
spirits – the rest of the party relied chiefly on the lad’s reports – and she ascribed


--- PAGE 223 ---
the exceptional success of the necromancer’s rituals to the boy’s impressionable
nature.2 No doubt it could have happened. Conjuring demons is hardly the most
implausible undertaking humans have devoted themselves to, and it seems prima
facie unlikely that books of necromancy would have circulated in late medieval
and early modern Europe without occasional use of the experiments they
contained. The results may more often have been those experienced by Gilles de
Rais, who engaged more than one clerical necromancer in an effort to recoup his
finances with demonic aid, but who found the conjurations utterly without effect
– except when he was not looking, at which point the necromancer would assure
him that ferocious spirits had come and beaten him mercilessly.3 Gilles de Rais’s
necromancers were perhaps typical in their skilful deception of a gullible client.
One is reminded of the necromancers, including a former Templar, who strung
Cardinal Francesco Caetani along, begging for time to complete their
experiments, and pleading that they could not do so because they were unable to
locate such necessary items as a hoopoe.4 The necromancer appears often to
have been a mountebank, and the most important factor in his success was
perhaps the credulity of his client. Yet one hesitates to generalize; if clients could
place faith in necromancy, this was in part because the broader culture took the
matter seriously enough to prosecute people for exercising the art, and few
doubted in principle that conjuring could succeed, so there must have been
necromancers and would-be necromancers who copied out experiments into
their books in the hope of having close encounters with malign but potentially
useful spirits.
In some respects the story of Benvenuto Cellini is consonant with the picture
of necromancy given in the Munich handbook, while in other ways it is not. The
use of circles, conjurations and suffumigations, the recruitment of a young boy,
and the presence of a few companions – all this is typical of what we have seen
in the necromancer’s manual. The use of a classical language is again expected,
although Greek and Hebrew may have been exceptional. The experiments in the
Munich handbook sometimes instruct the spirits to come in pleasant and
nonthreatening form, as if the conjurers were aware that the experience of
Cellini and his friends – a veritable temptation of Saint Anthony – might befall
them. What is most unusual about Cellini’s report is precisely its drama. The
demons foreseen in the Munich manuscript are made tame, domesticated, even
docile in comparison. The conjurations are intended to coerce the spirits, and the
expectation is that these spirits will present themselves in a mood of submission
to the necromancer’s constraint. Yet the writer surely knew the alternative


