SOURCE: Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites — PDF version (cross-reference)
CHUNK: 1/39  |  CHARS: 0-23339 of 911762
============================================================

--- PAGE 2 ---
Forbidden
Rites


--- PAGE 3 ---
Magic in History
Forbidden
Rites
A Necromancer’s Manual of
the Fifteenth Century
Richard Kieckhefer
THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIVERSITY PRESS
University Park, Pennsylvania


--- PAGE 4 ---
Copyright © 1997 Richard Kieckhefer
Published in 1998 in the United States of America and Canada by The Pennsylvania State University Press,
University Park, PA 16802
First published in 1997 in the United Kingdom by Sutton Publishing Limited
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Kieckhefer, Richard.
Forbidden rites : a necromancer's manual of the fifteenth century / Richard Kieckhefer.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 0-271-01750-3 (cloth : alk. paper)
ISBN 0-271-01751-1 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Bayerische Staatsbibliothek. Manuscript. Clm 849. 2 Magic—History. 3. Demonology—History.
I. Title.
BF1593.K525    1997
133.4'3—dc21
97-26745
Fifth printing, 2012
It is the policy of The Pennsylvania State University Press to use acid-free paper for the first printing of all
clothbound books. Publications on uncoated stock satisfy minimum requirements of American National
Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence of Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48—
1992.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Contents
TABLES
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
1.   Introduction
MAGICAL BOOKS AND MAGICAL RITES
2.   The Munich Handbook of Necromancy
Clm 849
3.   Banquets, Horses and Castles
ILLUSIONIST EXPERIMENTS
4.   Love, Favour and Madness
PSYCHOLOGICAL EXPERIMENTS
5.   Learning Hidden and Future Things
DIVINATORY EXPERIMENTS
6.   Formulas for Commanding Spirits
CONJURATIONS AND EXORCISMS
7.   Demons and Daimons
THE SPIRITS CONJURED
8.   THE MAGIC OF CIRCLES AND SPHERES
9.   CONCLUSION
EDITION OF THE NECROMANCER’S HANDBOOK IN Clm 849, FOLS 3r–108v
SELECTIVE BIBLIOGRAPHY


--- PAGE 6 ---
PLATES
INDEX


--- PAGE 7 ---
Tables
A.   Experiments in Clm 849, fols 3–108
B.   Types of necromancy found in Clm 849
C.   Spirits named in the conjurations
D.   Spirits listed in no. 34
E.   Specifications for each day of the week
F.   Specifications for day hours
G.   Specifications for night hours
H.   Gatherings of Clm 849


--- PAGE 8 ---
Acknowledgements
I am indebted to the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek for providing a microfilm and
photographs of Clm 849; to the British Library and Cambridge University
Library for providing relevant materials; to Martina Stratmann for supplying a
codicological analysis of Clm 849; to Barbara Newman, H.C. Erik Midelfort,
Steve Muhlberger, John Leland and Frank Klaassen for reading my analysis,
sharing with me their insights, giving me the benefit of their suggestions, and
helping to protect me from errors; to Charles Burnett in particular, who read both
the analysis and the edition of the manuscript with meticulous care and expertise
and helped resolve many problems; to Vincent Cornell and Sani Umar for
information about Arabic texts; and to Persephone, a familiar companion who
reminds me constantly about the significance of my work.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Cave! terrentia hac in scientia latent, si cupis
scire occulta, pericula multa pro te et upupis!


--- PAGE 10 ---
W
1
Introduction: Magical Books
and Magical Rites
e are what we read – and the power of books to transform the minds
and personalities of their readers can give cause for anxiety as well
as for celebration. A cluster of related developments in late medieval
Europe brought heightened concern about what people were reading. The
spread of literacy and the rise of a far wider reading public, lay as well as
clerical, brought greater demand for written material. The availability of
paper, a medium far less costly than parchment, made books more readily
accessible than they had previously been, and allowed for more abundant
supply of reading matter to feed this demand, even before the invention of
printing with movable type. And the emergence of silent reading habits
made reading a more private activity.1 Historians have attended to the
impact of these developments on medieval heresy, on churchmen’s fear that
literacy contributed to the diffusion of heretical views, and on the efforts at
censorship that ensued. But less work has been done on the dissemination of
magical texts, which in some ways represented an even more sinister threat
to orthodox culture, and on attempts to control these texts.2 A book of magic
which deliberately and expressly invited contact with demons presented all
the hazards of reading in their deepest and most pressing form.
Beginning around the early fourteenth century, possession and use of
magical writings becomes a recurrent theme in the records of prosecution.
When Bernard Délicieux was accused in 1319 of having used necromancy
against the pope, he was cleared of that charge but nevertheless condemned
to prison for merely possessing a book of necromancy.3 Fear of necromancy
and of necromantic writings was becoming an obsession at the time,
especially at the court of Pope John XXII, who in the previous year had
commissioned the bishop of Fréjus and others to investigate a group of
clerics and laymen charged with using books of necromancy, geomancy and
other magical arts.4 In 1320 Matteo and Galeazzo Visconti were tried for


--- PAGE 11 ---
using necromancy against Pope John; the offence here was actual use of the
art, yet when one witness said he had been shown a book filled with
experiments for love, hatred, finding of stolen objects and so forth, the very
sight of such a book was evidently cause for horror.5 In 1406–7, informants
claimed that a group of clerics had used formulas from magical books
against Benedict XIII and the king of France, and the ensuing inquiry
uncovered a box filled with booklets containing prayers, hymns and
conjurations.6 But in 1409, at the Council of Pisa, Benedict in turn was
charged with using necromancy and hiring necromancers. The pope, it was
said, had sought out a book of necromancy available only from the Saracens
and had purchased it for some 1,000 francs. A book of necromancy was
allegedly found under the pontiff’s bed.7 In such cases the uncovering of
necromantic writings made more plausible the charge that necromancy had
actually been used, but more fundamentally the books themselves would
have impressed contemporaries as unsavoury and incriminating, somewhat
as the discovery of Satanic paraphernalia might seem incriminating today.
Not surprisingly, inquisitors and other judges used such discoveries as
propaganda in their zealous campaigns against magic. In 1382 an inquisitor
wrote to the government of Siena about a band of magicians at Rugomagno;
one Agnolo di Corso had been found in possession of a book of seventy
chapters, which others had copied, and which spoke of invoking evil spirits
to murder people or constrain their affections.8 Two years later Niccolò
Consigli was executed at Florence for practicing necromancy and
unlicensed exorcisms; his judges confiscated and burned the books of
necromancy from which he had taken conjurations.9 One might even say it
was common for books of magic to be set forth as codefendants alongside
their owners and users – and indeed, as we shall see, those who condemned
books of magic in some ways ascribed to them a kind of personality.10 When
the books were burned, there were those (as we shall see) who heard the
voices of demons in the crackling of the flames.
The book-burning might at times be voluntary: according to a fifteenth-
century biographer, Gerard Groot studied magic in his youth, and was
accused of practising it as well, but when he converted to a life of piety and
foreswore the art of necromancy, he consigned his books of magic to the
flames.11 The movement he went on to found, the Devotio Moderna, was
one of the most influential forces in the devotional culture of pre-
Reformation Europe, a movement of inner piety nurtured by devout reading,


--- PAGE 12 ---
manifested in the copying out of pious phrases in personal florilegia, and
financially supported by the copying of manuscripts – a movement, in short,
firmly grounded in the book-culture of late medieval Europe, and initiated
with an act of penitential book-burning.
From the early years of Christianity, conversion to Christ had meant,
among other things, doing away with books of magic. The scene at Ephesus,
as described in the Acts of the Apostles (18:19–19:20), perhaps epitomized
what happened on a smaller scale elsewhere. When Paul arrived in the town
and made converts to the new faith, ‘a number of those who practised magic
arts brought their books together and burned them in the sight of all, and
they counted the value of them and found it came to fifty thousand pieces of
silver’.12 (This comes to roughly 1,666 times as many silver pieces as Judas
received for betraying Christ.) By the later Middle Ages, treatment of those
found with offending literature was often more judicial than pastoral. To be
sure, a monk of Sulby monastery was treated leniently when he was found
possessing books of magic in 1500. A superior in the Premonstratensian
order had heard of a brother named Thomas Wryght who had been using
books of experiments and gone about paying people generously to teach
him the occult arts. Faced with the evidence – one of his books of
experiments – he insisted that he owned such books only out of curiosity,
not for actual use. The matter was treated as a disciplinary one within the
monastic setting, and the brother received a light penance.13 But in an age
when books of this sort were held in deep suspicion one could never count
on such clemency, as Bernard Délicieux well knew.
Anything that arouses such deep anxiety is a subject of historical interest,
and books of magic hold considerable fascination indeed. To know why
books of magic aroused fear we must gain a fuller understanding of what
the books themselves were likely to contain. Most of them no doubt have
perished in the inquisitors’ flames, but some eluded detection and have
survived. The focus of following chapters in this study is arguably among
the most interesting sources we have for the study of medieval magic: a
fifteenth-century handbook of explicitly demonic magic, or what
contemporaries called ‘necromancy’. This compilation is contained in a
manuscript in the Bavarian State Library in Munich. To be sure, the text is
neither edifying nor profound, nor is it particularly original; in late medieval
Europe there were no doubt many compilations equally illustrative of
common magical practice, most of them now lost. But among the


--- PAGE 13 ---
manuscripts that survive, few are quite as diverse in content, or as full,
explicit and candid in their instructions as this work.
Detailed examination of such a compilation may most obviously help us
understand the mentality of the necromancers themselves who copied such
books, whether for curiosity or for use. But study of this handbook may
clarify several other factors in the history of magic, and three in particular.
First, examination of a necromancer’s manual sheds light on the function
and cultural significance of a magical book itself. We will know more about
the cultural significance of books generally – and we will know more fully
the range of meanings a book could have – when we have grasped the role
of this exceptional category of books. Second, the mentality of the
necromancers’ opponents becomes clearer from examination of such a
compilation: the views of the Renaissance mages (such as Marsilio Ficino
and Johannes Reuchlin) who insisted that they practised a higher and purer
form of magic than did these base necromancers, and those of the
demonologists (Heinrich Kramer and his successors) for whom necromancy
was a dark filter shading their perception of witchcraft. The reactions of the
opponents may be historically more important than the attitudes of the
necromancers themselves, because they tell us more about the culture as a
whole, but we cannot begin to comprehend these reactions without knowing
the realities on which they were based. Third, the rites contained in this
compendium illustrate strikingly the links between magical practice and
orthodox liturgy. The analogy I will use is that of a tapestry, whose display
side implies a reverse side: so too, a society that ascribes a high degree of
power to ritual and its users will invite the development of unofficial and
transgressive ritual, related in form to its official counterpart, however
sharply it may differ in its uses.
A book of magic as a cultural artifact
A book of magic is also a magical book. It not only tells how to perform
magical works, but shares in the numinous qualities and powers of the rites
it contains. To be sure, not all magic is book magic: much magical practice
arises from oral culture, is transmitted orally, and is used without needing
inscription on paper or parchment, even if it is the largely accidental
circumstance of its having been transcribed at some point that accounts for
its survival and its accessibility to us. But in the later Middle Ages certain


--- PAGE 14 ---
forms of magic were increasingly assimilated to liturgy and increasingly
written, so that a magical act was the performance from a script, or the
observance of a rite whose details were enshrined in a text. This
development surely owed much to the spread of literacy among the laity, but
even more to the practice of magic among the clergy, particularly those on
the fringes of the clerical elite. Judicial and anecdotal evidence suggests that
explicitly demonic magic, called ‘nigromancy’ or ‘necromancy’,14 was
largely the domain of priests, perhaps especially those without full-time
parish employment, as well as ordained monks with some education and
esoteric interests, university students and others who had been received into
minor orders.15 It was within this context that a book of magic would most
naturally be perceived as a magical book, sharing in the numinous quality of
the rites it prescribes.
Christian ritual had from early centuries been the enactment not of oral
tradition but of texts embodied in books. With the unprecedented late
medieval diffusion of literacy, availability of reading matter and expansion
of the clergy, books might still be accessible only to an elite, but it was a
much expanded elite, and the numbers and varieties of books available were
far greater than in previous centuries, so that maintaining control over this
diffusion and this variety was scarcely possible, however much hierarchs
may have attempted to censor the available reading matter. Little surprise,
then, if books of magic found their way onto some readers’ shelves, whether
for use or for mere curiosity.
Apart from its function as a repository of information and insight, a book
can be of interest as a physical object, as a mirror of its writer’s life and
mind, and as a mirror of the society and culture from which it emanates and
to which it returns. The surviving books of medieval demonic magic repay
study from each of these perspectives, although their claims to significance
differ from those of ordinary texts: a book of magic is a physical object like
any other book, but even as object it is perceived as having sinister power,
as a kind of negative relic; it reveals something of the writer’s life and mind,
but more often than in most other cases, and for more obviously compelling
reasons, the authorship remains anonymous or pseudonymous; and it serves
as a mirror of the surrounding culture, but often the mirror is a distorting
one, a deliberately transgressive adaptation of what the society takes to be
holy.
Any book of rituals serves as point of contact between sacred texts


--- PAGE 15 ---
(permanent, authoritative repositories of power) and their performance
(which utilizes this power for specific occasions). The book itself, like a
liturgical vessel or a sacred building, is consecrated; when a formula is read
from it, the power of the text is enhanced by the sacrality of the book from
which it is read. A book of magic may also be consecrated, to confirm the
numinous power resident in the physical object. A book of magic is thus
significant not only as a source for information about magical practice –
generally more reliable than court records, denunciatory treatises and
literary accounts – but also as itself a magical object, treasured and closely
guarded by its possessors, and condemned to burning by judges in mimickry
of the punishment that might await the magicians themselves.
This perception of a book of magic as itself a magical object, and
therefore as suspect, is seldom so dramatically manifested as in the
canonization proceedings for Archbishop Antoninus of Florence (the man
from whom, incidentally, the Malleus maleficarum derived most of its
misogynist tropes).16 One witness to the sanctity of the archbishop told how
the saint had gone one day to a barber-surgeon of Florence named Master
Peter to have his hair cut. During the process the prelate began to wonder
how a man who read no Latin was able not only to cut hair but also to cure
the sick people who came to him. He learned that the barber had obtained a
‘book of surgery’ from a Cistercian and had learned from it the art of
healing. Antoninus asked Peter to bring forth this book and show it to him;
the man readily complied.
The archbishop recognized that the book was full of incantations, and
formulas and signs belonging to the wicked magical arts. So one day he
went to San Marco for lunch, and when certain members of the city’s
nobility were with him in the cloister after the meal, he had fire brought
in an earthen vessel, and he set fire to the book. Immediately the air was
so darkened that the citizens were afraid, and clung to the archbishop. He
comforted them, saying that when the book was fully burned this
darkening and clouding of the air would cease, as indeed happened.
Then, calling these citizens and Master Peter about him, he explained
that the book contained incantations, and that at some point a mass had
been celebrated over it for conjuring and summoning demons, so that
wherever the book was, a multitude of demons resided there.


--- PAGE 16 ---
The burning thus served as an exorcism; the very pages seemed quite
literally infected by demons, who needed to be banished. Once this was
accomplished, Antoninus admonished Peter to find some other means for
healing the sick; the man obeyed this admonition, and the canonization
proceedings assure us that God did not allow his family to go lacking.
The notion that demons could infest a book appears elsewhere: Michael
Scot told of a magical book inhabited by spirits who call out when the book
is opened, ‘What do you want? What do you seek? What do you order? Say
what you want and it shall be done forthwith.’17 The theme admits at least
two interpretations. One might see it as a way of symbolizing the ubiquity
of malign spirits, their eagerness to seize any opportunity for mischief, and
their dense concentration in those places and objects seen as special
‘occasions of sin’. Beyond this, it can express obsessive anxiety about the
book itself as an object invested with a kind of negative sacrality, something
taboo, a source of spiritual and psychological contagion. The difference is
not that the first interpretation is cultural and the second psychological; both
interpretations function on both levels, relating the concerns of individual
observers to the shared perceptions of the society. But the first interpretation
places greater weight on the theological assumption that malevolent forces
are secretly present in the world, an ‘objective’ assumption in the sense that
it is widely diffused within the culture, eliciting and appealing to a diversity
of personal concerns and anxieties, while the second stresses the aversion of
the individual observer, a reaction inevitably both experienced and
expressed in culturally conditioned terms.
Archbishop Antoninus’s authority was perhaps too great for a mere
barber-surgeon to challenge his interpretation of the book he had been using,
but not all practitioners were so amenable to instruction. In the 1340s, the
inquisitor Pietro da l’Aquila charged the Florentine physician Francesco di
Simone with having purchased a book on the virtues of herbs, in which
(according to the inquisitor) there was necromantic content. The physician
testified that he had indeed bought such a book, but that there was no taint
of necromancy in it, and if he had known that the volume contained
anything prohibited he would never have bought it.18 It makes little
difference for our present purposes whether the inquisitor’s or the
archbishop’s reading of a particular book was correct, or grounded in a
careful reading of the volume’s contents. Either of them might have been
scandalized by simple charms of a sort that a theologian would in principle


--- PAGE 17 ---
have deemed innocent but a careless or overly zealous critic might perceive
as tainted and implicitly demonic.19 In other cases it seems more likely that
magical books condemned as demonic were in fact collections of expressly
demonic magic; Piero di ser Lippo claimed that the book he confiscated
from Agnolo di Corso contained formulas for adoration and invocation of
spirits such as Satan and Beelzebub, and there is no reason to doubt that the
inquisitor encountered a work of genuine demonic magic, of the sort that
have on occasion survived.
Less dramatic than the action of Archbishop Antoninus, but similar to it
in certain respects, was the judicial treatment of a magical book by the
secular authorities at Dijon:
Concerning the execution [exécution] of a book of devilry [deablerie].
On the sixth day of August, in the year 1463, at the command of my
lords of the Chambre des comptes at Dijon, after consultation in this
Chambre, a book made of paper and covered with leather that was
colored green was brought from the house and residence of the widow
and heirs of Thomas of Dampmartin, during his life resident of Dijon. In
this book were written many evil and false invocations of devils
[deables], divinations, charms [charoyes], and other things of the
magical art, which give very bad example and are against God and the
holy Christian faith. In it were contained many depictions of devils and
other detestable figures and characters. At the end of this book were
several chapters and articles on necromancy [nigromance] and
chiromancy. This book had been seen by my lords of the Council and the
Chambres des comptes. And after they inspected it with great and serious
deliberation – in the presence of lord Jehan Bon Varlet, priest of the
chapel of my lord the duke of Dijon, dean of Saint-Seigne, vicar and
scelleur of the reverend father in God my lord the bishop of Lengres in
Dijon; master Jehan de Molesmes, secretary of my lord the duke; Ayme
d’Eschenon, mayor of the town and commune of Dijon; Jehan Rabustel,
procurator of that town; Aimé Barjod, procurator of my lord in the
district of Dijon; and many others – this book was cast into the fire and
totally burned to cinders, to the despite and confusion of the evil enemies
[of the faith], and so that it could never again be used in any manner.20
Here there is no allegation of supernatural phenomena, and the book is not


