Cipher is concealed) with that book (where it was written), in which the laws were contained, new characters were used, which had been received by the Jews from Isis, Montani, and all times' successors; so that not only among the Hebrews the cipher would also persist, but rather than their own, as those who found 98 [something] there, it is more obscurely transformed, so that if the Tyrian letter, another Palamedes,

E 4 & pra

[p.92]

92. De Occult. Lit. Not.
& for Palamedes and Simonides Melici equally
in line lib. ¢. other things are to be placed, or from the opposite; For if the old apis. Tacit. in monuments faith must be kept, Tyrian Anna it put Greek letters induced number fexald. of poct, decim, posthunc Palamedes four, demum., diaki& — Simonides totidem adiunxifle traditur: ita nt omnes quatuor & vigintinumerambosvolvant.
These are the main hidden (ciphering) genera,
truly from them many species emanate, which due to their different composition vary, for order, transposition, figure, form, and multiplex possibility of use is possible, and thus they themselves differ most in order to make the cryptic perplexity easier, whence so many diverse genera, which various ingenuity has conceived at all times. But these things in such places will be clearer when read, why it is desirable here that they appear absurdly from the utmost. Now let us leave the rest.

Carvit IL
That through letter transposition hidden [ciphering] is possible.
ss. Gents gs 4 igitur ad occulté {cribendi modosac- | petacheors cedamus, ratio pofcit, ut ab ordinistran-
feu potiusze- {pofitione , & inhoc generea fimplicifsimis &
ae Gow {criptu facillimis exordiamur.Initijs enim fim-
pliciora magis convenire videntur, talique or-
dine omnes ad disciplinas commodius proves
himur, ut prima cognitu facilia,moxaliquan-
to difficiliora, & minus simpicia difcamus.
, 6 Quare¢

[p.93]

, Lisear SBCVNDYVS. 73

b Quareinter czteros talis {cripture modos ¢ }- Modus

Translation:

Cipher is concealed) with that book (where it was written), in which the laws were contained, new characters were used, which had been received by the Jews from Isis, Montani, and all times' successors; so that not only among the Hebrews the cipher would also persist, but rather than their own, as those who found 98 [something] there, it is more obscurely transformed, so that if the Tyrian letter, another Palamedes,

E 4 & pra

[p.92]

92. De Occult. Lit. Not.
& for Palamedes and Simonides Melici equally
in line lib. ¢. other things are to be placed, or from the opposite; For if the old apis. Tacit. in monuments faith must be kept, Tyrian Anna it put Greek letters induced number fexald. of poct, decim, posthunc Palamedes four, demum., diaki& — Simonides totidem adiunxifle traditur: ita nt omnes quatuor & vigintinumerambosvolvant.
These are the main hidden (ciphering) genera,
truly from them many species eman

They are surrounded by this thing without being ignorant of it, namely,

here first occurs that which is contained by art, so that letters are certainly arranged in a certain order and placed in {cipher.

The duplex ratio of this kind is: the other is, which if one carefully considers will appear to be able to remove suspicion “that I, having received, would then have it for fear of too great curiosity, but rather observing the matter in its proper order, how the literary connection is transferred so that it may be understood.”

The first mode of ratio here is Batie.

The purpose of the first verse example is indicated: two lines are taken in which letters are placed: the first letter in the uppermost, the next in the lower, alternately in the upper and lower, the fourth in the lower alternating with the others; when all the letters are thus filled, the line is completed, so that each occupies its place, until the total number of lines is fulfilled; which means that sometimes two extreme lines remain half-filled.

These verses are first submitted to our cipher examples. Thus Praep™ MARDENTISSIMO AMOREINCENSVSSVM, VERKVYM SIGNIFICATIONEM ADHVC NVL- LAM DED!I, HABITA RATIONE VERE- CVNDI4 Tv4, ET PARENTVM. QVARE Nist AMANTI SVBVENTVM SIT, TVA VI- CTVS S2AVITIA COGAR VITAM DIMITTERE.

Thus the words are to be formed in the form of {cipher for submission, the cipher will indicate the literary order of transfer.

Ex. tir

[p.94]

Translation:

They are surrounded by this thing without being ignorant of it, namely,

here first occurs that which is contained by art, so that letters are certainly arranged in a certain order and placed in {cipher.

The duplex ratio of this kind is: the other is, which if one carefully considers will appear to be able to remove suspicion “that I, having received, would then have it for fear of too great curiosity, but rather observing the matter in its proper order, how the literary connection is transferred so that it may be understood.”

The first mode of ratio here is Batie.

The purpose of the first verse example is indicated: two lines are taken in which letters are placed: the first letter in the uppermost, the next in the lower, alternately in the upper and lower, the fourth in the lower alternating with the others; when all the letters are thus filled, the line is completed, so that each occupies its place, until the total number of lines is fulfilled; which means that sometimes two extreme lines remain half-filled.

These verses are first submitted to our cipher examples. Thus Praep™ MARDENTISSIMO AMOREINCENSVSSVM, VERKVYM SIGNIFICATIONEM ADHVC NVL- LAM DED!I, HABITA RATIONE VERE- CVNDI4 Tv4, ET PARENTVM. QVARE Nist AMANTI SVBVENTVM SIT, TVA VI- CTVS S2AVITIA COGAR VITAM DIMITTERE.

Thus the words are to be formed in the form of {cipher for submission, the cipher will indicate the literary order of transfer.

Ex. tir

[p.94]

"74 De Occultis. Lin Nor.
tirdmretstomricnusm,ecusgttias
upicadnismaoenessuurminfcte
nmdunladdhbbtrtoeceeudeneprnu
eahculmei,aiaainurcntita,taectm
qaetimntuunustuuncusuhtaoautm
arnsadtsbetmitattsatit¢cgriad
MBSe F :
mt ee :
ezRatio. eSed perplexius &involutum magisfcriptum
erit, finumerus verfuum adhuc duplicabitur,
vt quatuor primum lineis conftitutis, liter ¢o
ordinecollocentur: vt prima primi verfus ini-
tio, proxima quarti tertiain fine primé, quar-
_ tain fine poştremi, quinta deinde initio fecun-
diverfus, sextainitiotertij, feptimain calce se-
cundi, o@ava demum in calce tertij dispo-
nuntur, &idem poštmodum ordo fervetur, vt fub-
jectoexemplo res clariusfugge¥etur.
tmsruuimlhteuneuobadassitret
reocmginudtedpuraecrdnnienmta
-\ “ gnadeunocecanhtiametrainuefrsate
= uasesmcalatcattunnimbtiunmadp
qtusctuittautuma
ennusomriaunuuii
ntetaeaeagdemrtimss
Oe 42 Feac-stear
Sic variata femper literarum tranfpofitione,
complures involutos fcribendi modos nan-
_cifcémur: quos poterit quisfq; suo moreindu-
cere, nobis enim hec attingere videtur fatis.
f9.modusfer F Piet etiam aliter, vt ex literz’in principio &
_ Roum fa “medio tantum defignato ordre, vel principio
Osts. &fine —

. 7

i we

Pe = on fo &
i

[p.95]

e's"

We need to reconstruct garbled Latin words.

Let's parse line by line:

"tirdmretstomricnusm,ecusgttias" likely "tridm ret om ricnus m"? Not sure. Maybe it's "tridm ret om ricnus m"? Could be "tridm ret om ricnus m". Might be "tridm ret om ricnus m"? Hmm.

Look at context: It seems to describe some arrangement of letters, maybe "tirdmretstomricnusm" -> "tridm ret st om ricnus m"? Could be "tridm ret st om ricnus m". Maybe it's "tridm ret st om ricnus m". Not helpful.

Next: "ecusgttias" maybe "ecus gttias" -> "ecus gttias". Could be "ecus gttias" = "ecus gttias"? Might be "ecus gttias" meaning "ecus gttias" (maybe "ecus gttias" is "ecus gttias").

Let's look at later lines: "upicadnismaoenessuurminfcte". Could be "upic ad nis ma oen es uur min fcte"? Maybe it's "upic ad nis ma oen es uur min fcte". Hmm.

"LrepBeR PRiMvVS. m5
& fine tantum, vel in principio; medio & fine
fimul collocentur. non tamen facile erit ad
hoc fignificantes femper diGiones fupperere, :
gatquiquotiesid commode fieri non poterit, £00 Aer
non abs re erit, tale {criptum componere, vt fignificante. '
nullumverbum, quod aliquid fignificet con-
tineat, vt alienus interpres ignoti idiomatis
opinione ambiguus teneatur, quodettfi fufpi-
cionenon carebit, arrificij tamen nequaquam
admonebitur, prafertim fi epiftola graci, vel
barbari alicuius fermonis, cuius cognitio
interceptori futuranot fit, fonum imitetur. E-
xemplum fubscripti thematis fubjiciam, vbi
fignificantes liter in initio, medio, & finecol-
locantur.
CvM DIVTIVS INTER NEAPOLITANOS
ET HOSTESS PYGNATYM ESSET, SPE Om-
Nr SE ABDICARE COACTI, RETRO ABI~
ERVNT.
Cheurim dri(u trafiberu fin thimelior nicba perofil iutla
nos eliteteblah orfet erftp, vlogeon, astin mes ffett flepole

olmin irfilefonimie asbidica rec oftaric tir eflur oabimenr
vrnot.

wit..& ee 2 TEL
Occulta literarum tranfpofitione aliter
fine fuspicione interpretem deludipoffe.
41) Roximum nunc eftalios occultosfcriben-« Secundus
di modos, qui quodam verborum vela-
™°4"s 74 |
mento obdu@ti, interpretem artificiofa fimu- extrFéoeus.
Jatione deludent, quod ad hac partem videtur
{peGare profequamur. Huiufmodifuntlepida
nonulla epigramata,aliaq; poetarum carmina:
| qu

[p.96]

: ‘

76 De Occvit. Lit. Nor.
quz leGores dulci quodam artificiodeludunt.
Que, ne quid preteream; quod adrem facere
pofsele videtur, apponam. Nam & hzc fuum
dolum habent: vt cum am‘cis liceat fuaviter
interdum fic jocari, & interpretem velata ver-
borum imagine ambiguum detinere, quod ju-
6 Vaga huins- Cundavrbanitate non carebit. 6Adhanc rem

: : e . . :
modiinfinita nulle afferri certe preceptiones poslunt: fed
Varictas."

This is a garbled OCR of Porta's text, likely from a poor scan or transcription error. I need to reconstruct the Latin as accurately as possible based on context and known patterns in Porta's work.

First, let's identify clear parts:

- "LrepBeR PRiMvVS. m5" → This is probably "Libellus Primus, m5" (The First Booklet, 5th edition or section 5). "m5" might be a typo for "libri V" or similar, but in Porta's works, he often uses Roman numerals. Wait, "m5

He wishes to play in the form; he will be deceived, for (the) poreft [perhaps "porta" or "pore" as a cipher term] — for each person multiplies the game of chance. Reason. He confines this matter by arbitrium (by his own judgment). This friend plays with this friend {by reading}. I send you the head of Venus, the belly of Diana [or "Diane"], the head of the thief, the posterior part of the dog [or "cank" possibly "canis"] — these verses signify deception. They are read through the word "ale", which (when) read {in a certain way} before, during, and after the indictions of Venus, medicine, and life. Reason = Diana, the thief, and the dog are sought. And many of these kinds of verses must be taken — but also in these letters one must prefigure what will be concealed, so that they may shine. — Thus the Erythraean Sibyl says, who, gracefully devoted to divine matters, surrounds herself with Christ, singing hymns.

1 If we consider the opinions of these people, using the same numbers as them (however it may be done), from the [c-] tone fervent, from whatever place it may be possible, from the mus [perhaps "musica" or "muses"], nonex- [perhaps "non-ex"] prefigure it.

geen ¥ »» ludicy fignum tellus fudore made(cet, »»E colo rex adveniet per {acla futurus,
»» Scslicet incarne prafens, vt indicet orbem.
»» Vnde Deum cernent incredulus atque fidelis,
»* Celfum cum fanitis, evi iam termino inipfo.
9 SK ania cum carne aderunt, quasiuducet ipfe,
: 5» Cie

the examples of the authors will be brought before fate — by whatever means — [p.97]

Liber SECVYNDVS: 77

Translation:

He wishes to play in the form; he will be deceived, for (the) poreft [perhaps "porta" or "pore" as a cipher term] — for each person multiplies the game of chance. Reason. He confines this matter by arbitrium (by his own judgment). This friend plays with this friend {by reading}. I send you the head of Venus, the belly of Diana [or "Diane"], the head of the thief, the posterior part of the dog [or "cank" possibly "canis"] — these verses signify deception. They are read through the word "ale", which (when) read {in a certain way} before, during, and after the indictions of Venus, medicine, and life. Reason = Diana, the thief, and the dog are sought. And many of these kinds of verses must be taken — but also in these letters one must prefigure what will be concealed, so that they may shine. — Thus the Erythraean Sibyl says, who, gracefully devoted to divine matters, surrounds herself with Christ, singing hymns.

1 If we consider the opinions of these people, using the same numbers as them (however it may be done), from the [c-] tone fervent, from whatever place it may be possible, from the mus [perhaps "musica" or "muses"], nonex- [perhaps "non-ex"] prefigure it.

geen ¥ »» ludicy fignum tellus fudore made(cet, »»E colo rex adveniet per {acla futurus,
»» Scslicet incarne prafens, vt

When the unripe denfs lies in the wombs of the world,
the royal seed is stirred; also the yoke and the gaze,
the fire burns the lands, the bridge and the pole,
Inquirens tears burst forth, Avernus opens its doors.
The fates of the saints, free light carries the flesh
will be handed over; eternal springs burn with flame,
secret acts renew themselves, and each will speak
secrets, and God will reveal hearts with light.
Thus this fire, with cold teeth, all are dissolved,
the leaf is torn apart, and the chorus perishes among the stars:
The sun petitions the sky, the wool's {blendor will cease to exist,
and God will descend upon hills, valleys exalted from below,
it will not be in human things sublime or lofty,
the plains measure mountains, the caravan of the bridge,
all will cease, the earth broken apart will perish.
Let the springs arise together, and rivers burn
And then the trumpet sounds from on high.
The world performs a mournful deed, various labors,
and the Tartarean Chaos shows the earth descending,
And from this before the Lord kings will be gathered to one.
He returned with fire and sulphurous streams. }
These verses Auguštinus in books of the city of Meri 7 s
Decrypted left, which Flaciano clarifies as adducit
with grace {cryptic things accepted and transmitted in 9;20 like
whose capitals are arranged letters. tur & Did. Co-
rum feriehac verbalegebantur, deus nerses tes JA fare relos~
ses ewrgp, quod latine est Issvs CHRISTVS 17. Rua. vbi
Det FILIvVS- SERVATOR. Veruminijslating ‘te observa-
s : vi Ciceronéhu
vtcunqueredditis,hac decaufa (vt Auguštinus ius verfionis
inquit) non potuit bene is fenfus occurrere, “ab gerivca sod
quod in greco verfu v initio diGionis pofita, seaque hac de
in latino fervari nequivit, nullaeft enim pine re feribit Fr.
ictlo,

[p.98]

Modern English reconstruction of garbled words:

- "denfs" → dens (dense, thick)
- "vepribus orbis" → vepribus likely "venerabilis orbis" or "ventris orbis"? Context: "in vepribus orbis" — possibly "in ventris orbis" (in the womb of the world). Reconstructed as "in ventris orbis".
- "Regcient fimulachra yiri; cunciam quoque gazam," → likely "regicent simulara viri; cuniam quoque gaze" — possibly "regicent simulacra viri; cuniam quoque gaze" — unclear. Maybe "regicent simula viri; cuniam quoque gaze" — perhaps "the royal seed stirs; also the yoke and the gaze". Reconstructed as: "the royal seed is stirred; also the yoke and the gaze".
- "Exuret terras ignis, pontum@ue polumque," → "exeret terras ignis, pontum et polumque" — fire burns lands, bridge and pole.
- "Inquirens tetri portas effringet Avernt." → "in iren's tears burst forth, Avernus opens its doors." Reconstructed: "In his tears, the gates of Avernus are broken."
- "Santtorum fedes, cuntte lux libera carnt"

"of hey bar | 78 De Occvit. Lrt. Not. ; © Mx senenf bie diGio, que a tali litera inciperet, & fententiz lib.2. Sibyl, CONgrueret, pari mododecatero adhancrem Bryth. peccatum eft. Horum quoque verbotum grz- — ; céprimelitere conjun@z iyéds efficiunt, idef~ Pisfcis, quonomine mysticé Chriftusinterpre- tatur, qui in huius mortalitatis abyflo, velutin > , aquarum profunditate, vivus, hoc eft, expers -f2.Exemplum peccati effe potuit. flocatur pari modo Plau- acroftichidis. rusin argumentori verfibus, dum Cécediara E) ticuliin cam rationé fic exprimit, AMPHITRYO.. , » Amore Captus Alcumena Iupiter +» Mutavit [efe mm formam eins coniugis, 2 | +, Pro patria Amphitruo dum certat cunt bostibus, », Habitu Mercurius et fubseruit Sofie, sy Is advenientis feryum, co dominum fruftra habet, » Turbas yori ciet Amphitruoatqueinvicem » Raptant promechis, Blepharo captus arbiter, » Veer fit, non quit Amphitruo decernere, 5, Omnemrem nofcunt, geminos Alcumena enititur. In hunc modum itaquelireris furtim ingeftis g3-Ratiofea fenfusoccultatur. ¢g Poffunt & alio modo feri- » Pouns alms pti literz occultari, vt per initia diGionum di- modus TH rr . ye : pergantur, quaretotidem didiones esfle, quot pasetevens, literasnecefleverit. Extamen quo magis rem 3 feriam yidebuntur innuere, eo mints fufpi-+ tionis habebunt, ut quando hic f{cribendi mo- dus facili interpretationi eft obnoxius, fimue _ #Exemplum, lationemuniatur. 4 Hujusmodierit, fimulier amanti Cave A Fratre fignificatura fic {cribit. Carmina autem Vergili erunt a Francifco recitata ante tunin ’Regem Eufebium."

* > er ah «' oe a
a - Ls
rs J ‘ -

iPoflunt

[p.99]

—_

: Lirper Primvyvs. 79
‘#Poffunt & in eum modum deligi verba, qua *3-Ratioms va- Oportunas {cripti literas non primas,fed poe f tremas, vel medias,sempertamenvnicoferva-

to ordineexarbitriocontineant. & Aliter Pria- <A¢mod™

pus quifimili feré verborum ambage fenten- fyllabas,
tianmnonliteris fedfyllabis celando,ficin fures

Pazpicars {evelle minans jocatur."

We need to translate into clear modern English, preserving technical terms. OCR garbled words: "de hey bar" maybe "De Hey Bar"? Might be title? "78 De Occvit. Lrt. Not." Probably "78 De Occultis

Envelopes first, the first of Didon is said to be,
And before C Ani, {the first syllable R Emi.
What is made from them for me you deprive in the garden

You will give, your fault is to be blamed.

7 It is another way of writing, and when you read it ‘? : Way
to praise, or to proclaim something wonderful, again the same “‘/#4*-
dictions beforehand laws, contrary per- 7° Pct reversed
cipiesfum. Adjuntcuiusdam verus. warinleopye

not a fire that recurs
Evil fortune, not evil mind, fate, not crime of life, or reciprocal,

Vivere suffer you places Thiphones. pr Pap Ms i
Supplicto tibi fit facilis, nec verbere multe Gri matic. li.

To compel you the God Thiphone.
If you turn over the days, it will say.
Thiphone God compels to compel many
Words, and it is not easy for you (by petition).
Thiphones places make you live
Crime, not fate, bad mind, not evil fortune.

They supply this thing with examples, that not being more lengthy, I will omit. m They are & other “liquoram
transferring genera, which because of ob. 7 “#7 #6E-
- f{euriora, and fine speculation appear to generate

there you are places as how ot i
pollicits fumus, in. ais. & Sie. vi

‘ ‘. we will say. I think.

GAPvr

[p.100]

4

Te De Oc cv_LT. Ltr. Nor.

Os 6 DP! pare ise
 \ Deoccultis feu furtivis charatterum
' notis effingendis. —

aSecunda Ge 4

nus modorum dini : ° es
Sralicatst diffe inis tranfpofirioneinterpretem arti

totam. ciosé deludunt, quod ad primum membrum
partitionis noftre pertinere videtur. Proxt-

mum eft jam illos profequamur, qui non nifa

& seonapa. maximocum labore posluntinterpretari.b Ve-
CHE va. rim antequam deillis verba faciamus,non ab-
fardum erit (tametfiid nemini difficile fortals

sé videatur) componendi, & {cribendi huius-

modi chara@erum notas rationem tradere,

quod non tantum efficiam, quia exsistimemid

aliter difficile futurum , quantum vt demon-

strem ad reliquas notas reété effingendas hec

ipfa que nunc tradimus precipué defiderart,

mus, id & de ceteris pre{criptum intelligatur.

Quare exemplum in hoc simplici rantum {eri-

Translation:

Envelopes first, the first of Didon is said to be,
And before C Ani, {the first syllable R Emi.
What is made from them for me you deprive in the garden

You will give, your fault is to be blamed.

7 It is another way of writing, and when you read it ‘? : Way
to praise, or to proclaim something wonderful, again the same “‘/#4*-
dictions beforehand laws, contrary per- 7° Pct reversed
cipiesfum. Adjuntcuiusdam verus. warinleopye

not a fire that recurs
Evil fortune, not evil mind, fate, not crime of

"To write in a bent manner, the cipher should be made. To write: Be that which is written in such a way that it may be read from any side; to conceal: Figure, Context, Proportion, Interval, and Facilitate, of which I will speak in detail.

Let us say this in order. But first concerning the characters:

O... : regarding figures and lines we shall say. For thus is power, if we wish to express hidden characters, necessary that the figure clearly demonstrate: a line must be made, from whose head another extends across to the right,

From these [the] writing modes which are — so that as it were one character may be written in this way ©. But a

| 
[p.101]"

Translation:

"To write in a bent manner, the cipher should be made. To write: Be that which is written in such a way that it may be read from any side; to conceal: Figure, Context, Proportion, Interval, and Facilitate, of which I will speak in detail.

Let us say this in order. But first concerning the characters:

O... : regarding figures and lines we shall say. For thus is power, if we wish to express hidden characters, necessary that the figure clearly demonstrate: a line must be made, from whose head another extends across to the right,

From these [the] writing modes which are — so that as it were one character may be written in this way ©. But a

| 
[p.101]"

"Serves HCV N Divs. Ss catur, &inferiori dimidiato minor fit, vel pau- J6 minor, ita vt gamma inverfum videatur 'T.
C hujusmodi erit, ve Z noftrum majusculum inverfumimetur: hoctenem discrienerit:
quod huic quartalinea, qaemadmodum pri- (QUeSMdr
'madu@a, tertiz coherebit ss .D character di- eusreclinati:
varicatis cruribus, in fastigio conjun@is de &4 =m :
pictus demonstrabit, fit avt grece liter lambe oom.
dz fimilis fit, in cujus capite recta lineafurfum f Quid i
ducatur, quz fua longitndine corpori chara- ¥¥acv
Gteris adequetur fic x. E duabus lineis trans-
' verfis, &in{umma conjundtis, quarum altera
finiftra crafsior,,¢ altera paulo fubrilior fit, tali ¢ Quid £ Vin-
figura A exprimetur. F proximus char@er pavaditentiaia
inverfus, vt fuperius linez hiatum habeant, & arzigonyet
inferius conjugatur, defignabit hoc modo V, wors eft literx
b Pro G. jusfe rotunditatis circulus defcribe- ¥- Cztera le-
aie ' oribuseodé
tur fic O, In afpirationislocam re&talinea,qu2 modo relin-
proximam figuram ezqualiter pertranfeat, de- 4° pertpen-
fienabitur, & fuperné & inferné excedat, & 4 , Be hee sicacstumore xqualiter ytrinque difiungantur hoc © loco G po-
pacto®. ProI duzlinezinlongumdu@z,quae
rum capita alia tran{verfa conjungat, yt nihil |
excedat, & longitudo latitudine duplo major
fit, vt fervetur characteris decus, depingetur
fic n. L linea reGain cuiuscalcealia tranfverfa
in dextrum ducatur, vicem fupplebit: fed in.
feriorlinea,quemadmodumin reliquis chara-
cteribus diGum eft, fuperiori dimidiato minor

fit t. Mcolumna, é cuius medio duzlinezin
dextrum producantur, quari alteradeorfum,
altera {urfum feratur,demonfrabit hoc modo"

[ p. 102 ]

™ . ‘Ss SPO aorth Oi. OPES,
4 7 ' » en : : :
:"

We need to translate into clear modern English, preserving technical terms (cipher names, plant/mineral names). The Latin is garbled; we must reconstruct best possible words.

Let's parse line by line.

First line: "| Lt’ SERVES HCV N Divs. Ss". Likely "Lt" maybe "littera"? Not sure. "SERVES HCV N Divs." Could be "Serves H C V N D I V S"? Might be abbreviations for letters? Maybe it's a cipher key: "SERVES HCV N Divs." Possibly "serves H C V N D I V S" meaning the letters serve as keys. Hard.

".

82 From Occult Letters Notis.

y- N must be the figure of a man, which will be completed. Draw a line from its foot to the other side in the right hand and let it be carried to the end so that the inverted T is formed, which expresses our C. inverted 5. The next figure duplicated will indicate this way, and otherwise the heel of another will grasp this form §. Q. Greek letter delta will design a triangular shape from it; Pro R the inverted figure of S is drawn 2. Pro S noftrum Dinverfum designabit y sic gq. T omega grecum inverfum demontrabit hoc modo w. Pro V recta linea in longum duda de. es pingetur, ¢cuius medio {pacio ali¢ duz ie *qualiter hiantes incalce producantur huiu modi 4. Pro X recta linea depingetur, ~ ~~ faftigioalteratranfverfa in finistrum produca turinhanc formam I. Z inverfa figura, quam I diximus indicari munere fungeturin hunc ,

ond agg _

modum uy. :

o|6°8
¢ e. 4.

Tt DR

eT 8 /
4 en
: As 2
Oo. g.
>, h,

[p.103]

SANS pHNER

These are the figures of letters that must be drawn: first, the next one is to be taken from the context again. Indeed, it does not refer little to the context of letters: so that in the same way, those which have been joined together will be connected; thus the modes of context, five connections; let it not be ignored, this must be understood by us, namely that a boundary of one is with the beginning of another. In this way there will be, when we wish to join V, N will be kept and the text, in the same way as 7, with _ I-hocexemplo, T will be joined, so that one part is drawn from the other at the beginning, in such a manner that it may not be inconvenient. And perhaps another connection, namely that the boundaries of two letters touch each other; for both >a: 5 will be this context in such a way

F 2 [ij Qus

:

:

)

|

.

;

—

a]

X ." -_-

[p.104]

ty

$4 From Occult Letters Notis

Translation:

82 From Occult Letters Notis.

y- N must be the figure of a man, which will be completed. Draw a line from its foot to the other side in the right hand and let it be carried to the end so that the inverted T is formed, which expresses our C. inverted 5. The next figure duplicated will indicate this way, and otherwise the heel of another will grasp this form §. Q. Greek letter delta will design a triangular shape from it; Pro R the inverted figure of S is drawn 2. Pro S noftrum Dinverfum designabit y sic gq. T omega grecum inverfum demontrabit hoc modo w. Pro V recta linea in longum duda de. es pingetur, ¢cuius medio {pacio ali¢ duz ie *qualiter hiantes incalce producantur huiu modi 4. Pro X recta linea depingetur, ~ ~~ fastigioalteratranfverfa in finistrum produca turinhanc formam I. Z inverfa figura, quam I diximus indicari munere fungeturin hunc ,

ond agg _

modum uy. :

o|6°8

Therefore, when the knot and its context are joined, all characters will be present except these four®Oa.
_ t% Proportion. / The proportion of letters in the parts of figures is found in the prominent points and the intervals between them. The parts of figures must have appropriate dimensions and thickness according to their form. Prominent points, which produce surds and subtleties, exceed the body of the letter by a certain amount; therefore, here the quantity of the body should also be considered. Intervals are considered within letters and numbers among themselves, by the interposition of elements from element to element, word to word, for ease. Magnitude must be joined with ease in characters; they must be formed as simply as possible, without the complexity of line figures, which burden the mind. Thus, the figure of new characters should be introduced gradually, with little difficulty... compatibility will suit them. All these characters with their figures must be properly arranged so that nothing is omitted: nothing should be added that does not follow an exact rationale, nor anything superfluous to be seen.
| tas Gapvr V.

* Definition of hidden things through secret letters.

n

a First principle

simplex. Here ...? then we will come to the modes of writing,
for: less (| .¥. in figures are permuted, not by laborious tracing but merit is seen here at first sight among simple things -
easy. This kind of writing, and most easily done as.
as we see with differing [and regarding these matters in this way
—

S;

[p.105]

Translation:

Therefore, when the knot and its context are joined, all characters will be present except these four®Oa.
_ t% Proportion. / The proportion of letters in the parts of figures is found in the prominent points and the intervals between them. The parts of figures must have appropriate dimensions and thickness according to their form. Prominent points, which produce surds and subtleties, exceed the body of the letter by a certain amount; therefore, here the quantity of the body should also be considered. Intervals are considered within letters and numbers among themselves, by the interposition of elements from element to element, word to word, for ease. Magnitude must be joined with ease in characters; they must be formed as simply as possible, without the complexity of line figures, which burden the mind. Thus, the figure of new characters should be introduced gradually, with little difficulty... compatibility will suit them. All these characters with their figures must be properly arranged so that nothing is omitted: nothing should be added that does not follow an exact rationale, nor anything superfluous to be seen.
| tas Gapvr V.

* Definition of hidden things through secret letters.

n

a First principle

simplex. Here ...? then we will come to the modes of writing,
for: less (| .¥. in figures are permuted, not by laborious tracing but merit is seen here at first sight among simple things -
easy. This kind of writing, and most easily done as.
as we see with differing [and regarding these matters in this way
—

S;

[p.105]

Lupus Secundy: 85  
more conveniently united: also given 42. Ratio.  
so that from here we may be warned, from which the remaining of this kind is found to be able to be sought for in a similar way, namely by Appellation-  
The reason of this name, because I call this simple writing method, lest it seem rashly taken: from which it follows that it should be prepared in this manner, so that the same writing methods among all others are most easily found. 2. They are called Simplices, because by leisure and useless letters (or pains) they are defended, and not confused with artifice or falsehood.  
This hidden [cipher] is thus. First of all it is determined in book 5: soon the entire sentence is decreed; not the first elements which simple [cipher] conceal, but they are stated, and each letter's sign is substituted for them, so that with their own additions they may be admitted, until whatever we wish is written in this way.  
Although what is said here is clear from itself, it will be more clearly indicated by example. Thus:  
After the meal of night, enemies approach; and unite Bellym; because today, strongly prepared for war, it fell, behold, the people will fall by the roots, and in the bowels of war.
F 3

[p.106]

86 De Occvir. Lit. Nor.  
BoaU' AAAIOA LIZLVUAT $)  
qUAd QOQ2AANANIN |  
AU TEUICA TALIA AAO  
ANIA AAP TA TINOA2OLAD  
VO2ZUITUA2 LAMIMAMU,ALSA:  

KAZDSAIOTMOAA ALIGAV  
TALI VITLLIAG Anu  

Cap-v¥t VL  
De dolis cx fallacys, quibus hec {cribendi ratio  

munmiatur, vt {criptum difficilior interpretetur.

Now translating this passage into clear, accurate modern English, preserving technical terms and reconstructing garbled OCR:

Lupus Secundy: 85  
more conveniently united: also given 42. Ratio.  
so that from here we may be warned, from which the remaining of this kind is found to be able to be sought for in a similar way, namely by Appellation-  
The reason of this name, because I call this simple writing method, lest it seem rashly taken: from which it follows that it should be prepared in this manner, so that the same writing methods among all others are most easily found. 2. They are called Simplices, because by leisure and useless letters (or pains) they are defended, and not confused with artifice or falsehood.  
This hidden [cipher] is thus. First of all it is determined in book 5: soon the entire sentence is decreed; not the first elements which simple [cipher] conceal, but they are stated, and each letter's sign is substituted for them, so that with their own additions they may be admitted, until whatever we wish is written in this way.  
Although what is said here is clear from itself, it will be more clearly indicated by example. Thus:  
After the meal of night, enemies approach; and unite Bellym; because today, strongly prepared for war, it fell, behold, the people will fall by the roots, and in the bowels of war.
F 3

[p.106]

86 De Occvir. Lit. Nor.  
BoaU' AAAIOA

From the hidden things of these {cipher, which, while they are still being investigated in this way, it is said that there is nothing more useful for deciphering them than to imitate such ciphers as much as possible and attempt to interpret them; but since many keys are often found, by which they can be comprehended, let us, using some of these principal ones, try to provide the propositions of others with new means for searching.

b1. Therefore, this art is first used

az. Mode, a difficult one.

| “mode. cont- manates & eorum notarij, qui epiftolas exa-

nua dictionum
connexio. De Fant, ve fimplices has notas tenebris offundat,

cuiusenodatlo ou minus inveftigentur,nullis namqueinter=

RE in lib, 3. ¢.9
- vallis di@iones diftingtnt, fed perpetuo con-
textu

[p.107]

LrieeR SECVYNDVS: 87

_ .textudiGiones producunt, vt verborum fines

& initianon nisfimagnocum labore dirimatur;
que res {criptum magis obfcurare videtur. Ve.
rim bunc {cribendi modum iccircé coniundum,
& continuum appellamus, quod {criptum con-
tinue inchartz latitudine procedit, ve tali pa-
terexemplo.

PERDITA SVYNT BONA, MINDARVS I Neo
TERIIT, VRBS STRATA HvMI Est, ESv-
RivNT TOT, QOVOT.SVPERFVERE VIVYI,,

P R&ATEREA OV AGENDA SVNT CONSVLITO.

SACANUOCALUTIDLOAMIA
O2ACMLVUACMMVUACTAGIVe =~

QUOFAMTACUAGACTIIA LU
DUAAD UCRAZVAACAATA
TI3COAUAZAOA AOAOOA LAO
GALUXD IGA INU)

His & cognata fraus effe poteftsc dum verfuum ¢*; Modus De - '
feries nomcontinuatur, fedintervalla verboru selib. 5. - “9
{uis terminis minimeé diftinguantur, & alia ver- |
baca alijs mifcentur,aliainterciduntur : quod
ex arbitrioecatantum ratione; quz comodior
fiet, {criptum occultabit, vt fiidem fcriben-
dum fit, in hunc modum cha.
-. ra&eres difpo-

nanctulr,

F 4 In

[p.108]

83 De Ocecvin Lit. Nine
RA2ATIVOGAL UTDIOAILAO 2
ACHLLOALMINO AZT AI020 VU
OF AMIACVAGAAM ALVOD
ATA ANOCLSACV AACAATIAITS
ZOAVUAZAOA AOAOO A.LAOTA
LUSDLITAINUY

---

Translation:

From the hidden things of these {cipher, which, while they are still being investigated in this way, it is said that there is nothing more useful for deciphering them than to imitate such ciphers as much as possible and attempt to interpret them; but since many keys are often found, by which they can be comprehended, let us, using some of these principal ones, try to provide the propositions of others with new means for searching.

b

The third mode also adds to his letters a place of their own, marked by fire signs.

They will be strengthened. They are accustomed to writing about this matter with addition.

Outside the number of the first elements,

of this same [something] — from enunciation they must produce fluid letters, which should be written at the beginning of the days, or at the end, or in the middle, while they are occupied with their own work, interpreting.

Note that datur (is given) for why exactly fourteen additions are called, because no other reason than the superfluous characters inserted — they deceive, whence also Nvciy [likely "Nuncius" or a name] is called, who has no power over letters at all, nor any role in speech. These things are done by many modes of writing, which are more difficult.

Thus

if the first addition is made, which with inserted signs is true,

the number of literary additions is irritated [disturbed?].

The second — the ordered series of vowels and consonants — will be removed.

3. we will teach (as much as is absolutely necessary) to remove them.

4. add more frequently repeated vowels, and frequent consonants are to be affirmed here.

Thus

RR ke Ye ser ere) ane ane eT mena [likely garbled text]

[p.109]

4 i
THE SECOND BOOK. 89

deception from ignorance of the beginning and end of the science of language, arises in this way, that the interpreter takes the word from idle speech; he will be caught, and in the same way will conclude. To this is added that the interpreter, more than many literary cryptic writers, is to be deceived by opinion, although they are able and the causes which we omit. Therefore, for these reasons, it is possible [to] involve the cryptic [message], so that neither the greatest interpreter nor one little exercised in this art sometimes finds difficulty in it; thus this tradition has a model.

* Example,

TO AAMIOAP LIEVAN $5
GUAT OEQO2AMIDIILLT AVE,

TILITUAATALIMISAATIO $5
ATIAXARD XTALINOA2OLKD
V>e@UTTUAZI SAZMATIUAAFS,
SIAEMS SD SMIOTMNULA AZT
"AUSTALINVILLUGA2TUH.

Translation:

The third mode also adds to his letters a place of their own, marked by fire signs.

They will be strengthened. They are accustomed to writing about this matter with addition.

Outside the number of the first elements,

of this same [something] — from enunciation they must produce fluid letters, which should be written at the beginning of the days, or at the end, or in the middle, while they are occupied with their own work, interpreting.

Note that datur (is given) for why exactly fourteen additions are called, because no other reason than the superfluous characters inserted — they deceive, whence also Nvciy [likely "Nuncius" or a name] is called, who has no power over letters at all, nor any role in speech. These things are done by many modes of writing, which are more difficult.

Thus

if the first addition is made, which with inserted signs is true,

the number of literary additions is irritated [disturbed?].

The second — the ordered series of vowels and consonants — will be removed.

3. we will teach (as much as is absolutely necessary) to remove them.

4. add more frequently repeated vowels, and frequent consonants are to be affirmed here.

Thus

RR ke Ye ser ere) ane ane eT mena [likely garbled text]

[p.109

To the cipher-makers, to whom we have nothing but the 4th Mode of TraGio that is added, many (modes) are found: XZY; from which whatever is convenient may be written, and it may be said Pro Q ponatur C V, for the first letter, whose place was filled in, they say C.

§. Similarly for Z double S. {it is said, for Y the last I is placed. There are also other letters Fg ' quads

[ p.110 ]

ail

90 De Occvrr. Lit. Nor.

Translation:

To the cipher-makers, to whom we have nothing but the 4th Mode of TraGio that is added, many (modes) are found: XZY; from which whatever is convenient may be written, and it may be said Pro Q ponatur C V, for the first letter, whose place was filled in, they say C.

§. Similarly for Z double S. {it is said, for Y the last I is placed. There are also other letters Fg ' quads

[ p.110 ]

ail

90 De Occvrr. Lit. Nor.