{ OF BEINGS:
of. 4S,
i.e., of the PI (U)RTIS ANIM! SENS A
OCCYLTE ALIIS SIGNIFICANDI,
and a bail to certain specified Godana: good,
ai s.w Quindus:

ge IBUS AUCTARIUM ACCESSIT,
Additamenta quzdam continens, ad precedentes li-
bros,tum novis inventis,tum pluribus exemplis,
auctiores & illuftriores reddendos:

JOAN. BAPTISTA PORTA
NAPOLITANO AUCTORE.

. xPt ICANTVR,AVTEM INTER
akS Gererum quod, fi ri ptorum loca, hac de arte

Mtha indidemq, petite, ong
cE. Pa ’ a“ a
Editio poştrema; priori cattigatior. “

ee Pe oe a de Lon

on f
TIhTL

Tees:
U

a

cm “~

WJ

ae
LA)
CS

eAfR GE Wo Ras
_ Mepeniia Lazari ZETZNERI Bibliop.
Mm. 826. Fi.

+ bt _
cy me Ben
a

[p.6]

ia

—- Ps he

- -

Le iy Same
~ i. ey

[p.7]

TYPOGRAPHUS
LEG perl...

———————— ltl
" =
#

= Ulto maximum inter cujufque
6 rei artifices imperitosque di-

j {crimen efle : velipsaexperien-
wx tia,non contemnenda iis in re-
Rais quae in agendo faciendove confiftunt
magisfra docemur:Hinc namque & wdifica-
turinonad fartores {utorefve confugimus,

ed ad cementarios, fabros lignarios,archi.
¢étos, aliosque artium cam ad rem perti-
jnentium gnaros: & écontra veftes aut cal-
éecamentaempturi, faciendave locaturi, nd
; x hos,fed ad illos nos conferimus. Aclicer
‘ii s, qui animum non advertunt,mechanicis
mtum inartibus id obtinere videatur: in
cliquis tamenomnibus quarum finis pra-
eipuus eft, aut actio aut operis cujufdam ef-
fetio, idem quoque locum habere, & mo-
ats ll virisdoctis credimus, & in quibuf-
dam nosipii proingenii tenuitate sic fat ma
nisfest deprehendimus, Sunt autem ejusc-
tiam generis ars civilis & militaris,co ipsoa
veteribus hoc dicttz nomine. Nam & has &
confimiles alias certis praceptis comprce-
hendi, certaque doceri discique methodo
pofie, non libri modode iisdem {cripti, fed

é& yiti maximi tam veteres , Quantum fcr
we De .

ol
Disfcrimen |
tmter ar “fs
ces 5 pers.
fos 4a'que
sper itas :
CM M4 G, ar-
tis,

Politica
Ars bellicéd

[p.8]

PRAPFPATIO

--- End of text ---

Now translate to clear modern English, preserving technical terms.

First line: "{ DE OCCU R A e OF Be N iF RUM ¥

We have also heard how many forms of the heavens are often indicated; which, when letters are combined with each other, whose signs are noted in the middle of the nut (perhaps "nut" is a corruption — likely "nucleus" or "node" in a cipher context), we do not judge it to be necessary. But politics, military affairs, and other branches of this same kind of art admit no small addition, namely, that friends should conceal themselves from those who might notice, and thus signify (something). Care must be taken by friends so as neither to use an improper cipher nor themselves soon be noticed, lest the things entrusted to them be intercepted in any way. Therefore, both the ancients and certain prudent men of later times have devised, and thought out, various stratagems for concealing matters not only from spirits but also from other hidden things; those who have further discussed this matter, as Ovid relates, and which Porta has also added: an elegant place is found at Aufonius, where some things are concealed, and finally [the passage ends abruptly].

[Page 9]

AD 122

Innumerable forms of the heavens often indicate (something).

Translation:

We have also heard how many forms of the heavens are often indicated; which, when letters are combined with each other, whose signs are noted in the middle of the nut (perhaps "nut" is a corruption — likely "nucleus" or "node" in a cipher context), we do not judge it to be necessary. But politics, military affairs, and other branches of this same kind of art admit no small addition, namely, that friends should conceal themselves from those who might notice, and thus signify (something). Care must be taken by friends so as neither to use an improper cipher nor themselves soon be noticed, lest the things entrusted to them be intercepted in any way. Therefore, both the ancients and certain prudent men of later times have devised, and thought out, various stratagems for concealing matters not only from spirits but also from other hidden things; those who have further discussed this matter, as Ovid relates, and which Porta has also added: an elegant place is found at Aufonius, where some things are concealed, and finally [the passage ends abruptly].

[Page 9]

AD 122

Innumerable forms of the heavens often indicate (something).

And secretly refer the sayings of the ancients.
But they do not remember the hidden things, nor are they glorified for their knowledge: they have forgotten them and seek them again at other times. Even when this has been done, as long as it is done rightly, the praise of these will remain entirely with Portus [Porta].
Although I am aware that, since the books themselves bear the marks of secret writing, many, from a love of good literature, have greatly desired this, so that others might more conveniently and at lesser cost be able to do so: they have led inanimate things, or rather have compelled the same things to speak. Afterwards, however, we will handle the matter again in the same way: which five, as we have said above, we obtain from you, with whose help we may also obtain the rest.
For regarding the subtlety of books, especially since the author has also handed over the key (or cipher), no addition is needed; and it must be corrected and kept safe:
and from these examples, more instructive ones: and besides good literature, on the other hand, one should also add what is found here with these books, together with a table. For utility, etc.

Editions
CAu ‘Ja.
Tr.
Commons-
tiones quae
dam.

1 Vrilitas
horam it

tur quod attinct: Dominus Porta non uta- bora,
+a

[p.10]

—,

3. Wrilitas.

.1 O
PRAFATI shuiys

lii, unamatquealteram tantu™ att duftri4
rationé attigit : fed circiter 1$°- $ nfinitis
diligentiaque pertractavit: Ut
tantum pattibus exuperarit hacin oe
fed & viam rationemque oftenderit » 4°
emo-
veltigia ipfius fecuti, innumeros prOP
dum aliosinfuper quog: > modés excogi-
tare poslimus. Id quod nobis uno atque al-
teroexempl9is,cujus animadverfiones ta-
bulasque edimus , oftendit. Trithemiana —
certé Polygraphia cum his Porte libris nec
methodi diligentia, necgenerum multitaea
dine,nec explicationis per{picuitate confe-
renda eft:licer non fine fructu operis utriuf-

re alios-

Prilitas WUC lectionem conjungi pofse non camus

Now, correcting the OCR errors and reconstructing the intended Latin where possible:

"Et clandeftinas veterum referare loquelas.
Sedutinam non folum meminiffent, aut de
cientia eflent gloriati:fedut ea dere inte-
greperfcripfiffent: aut fiperfcripferunt , ea
ad noftra quoque tempora perveniffent.
uod cum factum non eft, coufque dum
guid horum fiat fuaPortx laus conftabit in-
tegra. Quametiam obcausam , cum vide-
rem libros ipfius defurtivis literarum notis,
vulgode Ziferis inf{criptos, a bonarum ar-
tium ftudiofis magnopere expeti, caque for
macditos , ut alia potuerint multo com-
odiore minorifque parabili: inanimum
it duxi, mceo rurfum eofdem pralo com-
nittere. Pofteaquam autem remiplam ag-
agreflisfulus :

"you dig. And besides, the other kind of hidden things — far from being useful for military or civil purposes unless they are: tied {to physics and thus to all those whose mind is inclined toward secrets, Porta says — it must be read. Since in our pores there is something, this kind of thing cannot be prevented by the use of these, the hosts, and others who employ it; we cannot prohibit it. But if it happens (the use of which requires great effort from military and civil physicists) so that such kinds of secrets {may come into our hands: with Porta's help we can detect and reveal them. And thus also in this number,

[p.11]

To the READER.

— while we are dealing with this matter with more diligent care, they say Rumentalingifciante cells: that is, the method of finding and using this kind of hidden thing, as far as possible, by means of the ratio of evolution to a single plant, explicitly. What the ancient writers said; how much this art speaks here, either from the four elements, or in the same way with respect to numbers, carefully considered? that which, with correct judgments about things and the study of antiquity, is undoubtedly going to be very long-lasting, will have been indicated to us, as we shall see, by very heavy reasons for presenting it. D. Porta; since however the secretive nature is less pleasing to readers, and the title of Zipherum is not necessary, he who has pleased us and accepted [the work] will be more fully received: in that place we have tried to substitute. About the middle, which was the third thing, we can assert this: — or7_ great in our condition thus stated nu- Pender

* 4

4
;

ae

[p.12]

ee

IP.
De cxem-
ple gus bus
dam,

PR#H FATIO"

Let me carefully analyze and refine this translation:

First, I need to understand the context. This appears to be a preface or introduction to a work by Giambattista della Porta from his "De Occultis Literarum Notis" (1592). The text is discussing hidden knowledge, ciphers, and natural philosophy.

Let me go through the Latin passage systematically:

"inficias.Ac fanefinon alia,haccerte de caue — farci militaris civilifque cumprimis pr uden :tie {tudiofis atque adeo omnibus iis quibus” fecretaaliorum rimari animus, Porta pete — legendus eft. Quoniam in poreftate quidé © nostra eft, hacartenonuti-: {e¢dne adverfa-rii, hoftes, aliique eam ufurpent, prohibere non poffumus. Atquiliqua evenerit (de uo utiquerei militaris civilifque ftudiofis magnopere laborandum ) ut in manus'no- {tras cjus generis hofiilia {trategemata alia-ve (cripta perveniant: Porte auxilio eadem agznofcere detegereque poterimus. Ett c- mmc iplum qaoque in ls numeran- dum

[p.11]

Ap LECTOREM.

— dum quib. hilibrialiori hacde re editamo , Rumentalongiffimeantecellunt: quod nd folum inveniendorum hujus generis ftrategematum , fed & ufurpatorum abaliis, quoad fieri poteft, evolvendorum ratio- nem fingulariinduftria folertiaque explicit. Quid quod veterum {criptorum loca per; quam multa hacde

"merum. Id quod facile deprehendant , qui cam cum priore contulerint. Quodautem quarto loco de exemplis quibufdam hos monituros diximus, i ita fefereshabet. Du, im namque generum exempla afferre folet autor:alicna&{ua. Et quoadaliena qul- dem, veterum puta {criptorum , com- muni Omnium interpretum juretutus vi- detur. li namquecujufmodi invenerine talia quoque necaliter adducercefolent, Id enim nifieret, non interpretum sed aucto- rum fungerentr munetre, aut etiam falsiorum. Ea utem quz ipf{e confingit, inter- dum ejusmodi funr, ut aliaomnino ma- Juifemus : Sedcum lex Chriftianz cha- ratitis meliorem in partem omnia in-- terpretanda precipiat : non eam ob cau- fam adducta judicamus , ut quifquam ine confimilia audendi occafionem arripi- at:fedut ab improbis ufurpata -agnotcar, cofdemque dehortetur atque impediat. Ita namque & aliis quoque optimis quibufda in libris multa recenfentur improba: non ut caimitetur, fed ut tanto majore cautione vitare. prohibereque difcamus. Eriter facturis dcvia quoque locaque periculofa indicamus , ne alioquin corundem ignari in dispendium forte periculumye impru- dentes incidant, aliosque co properantes &ipi | tp! _ _ ne [p.13] Av LECTOREM."

This is a dense passage from Della Porta's *De Occultis Literarum Notis* (1592), written in a highly abbreviated and sometimes garbled Latin style typical of the period, especially when discussing cryptographic or esoteric topics.

Let’s reconstruct and translate carefully:

- "merum" — likely "morem" (death) or possibly "verum" (truth), but given context, probably "morem" (death). However, "merum" may be a corruption of "morum" (of the dead) or even "verum" (true). But looking at surrounding text: “Id quod facile deprehendant” — “that which is easily apprehended.” The phrase “cam cum priore contulerint” seems to be “cum priore conterfuerint” — “when they contend with the former [text/author].” So perhaps "merum" is a misreading of "morem" or "verum." Given that Della Porta often discusses truth and falsehood, and this passage warns against misinterpretation, it's likely "verum" (the true thing). But “merum” may be a typo for “verum.” Let’s assume “verum” — “the true thing.”

- “Id quod facile deprehendant , qui cam cum priore contulerint.” → “That which is easily apprehended by those who contend with the former [work/text].” Possibly: “that which is easily misunderstood by those who argue against the original.”

- “Quodautem quarto loco de exemplis quibufdam hos monituros diximus, i ita fefereshabet.” → “What we said in the fourth place about certain examples of these warnings, namely that it would be done thus.” The phrase “quibufdam” is likely “quibusdam” (certain). So: “we gave

Also, I wish to advise the reader; be careful that you have certainty, do not remove the preface, for it helps in this edition to be read; lest any work seem too foolish or absurd. We also want cautious and even admonished readers: so that you also carefully consider this matter, and beware that nothing good is spoiled by imprudence, which may turn into danger and harm through its own fault.

But with these prefaces. Also the fifth Auctarium should be recommended to the reader; this, from the author's recognition in the last part of his work, has been added here with these same additions and many examples, so that it may return to its readers as a supplement. We have therefore included the Auctarium books here up to this point: moreover, let us not add more books, nor prefaces and lines or indices, which would make it easier for the reader. Whoever wishes can refer each paragraph or addition to its proper place.

Finally, the last part of our admonition:

about these things, which are written in the book, and at the end, a few brief observations and schemata, briefly also giving the reason.

For this is the matter to be weighed: how difficult this material is, compared with the ease of understanding and memory.

V. De Au

V. De mar

ginalsb, ut

Votant, &-
tem tabu-
lis ¢§ Ant-
madver fie

nibs,

[p.14]

PRAEFATIO AB LECTOREM.

...eaufa obiteris,cuius ope ufi fumus,confcri- 
piir, liberaliterq; poteftatem fecit una cum 
his libris edendi: Ut fiqua forte poffint, a-
liis quoque fint ufivi: fin autem do@ioribus 
magisque abundantibus ocio, aut D.Portz 
aliter vilum,ab iisdemque certiora depre- 
Rent fuérint: hac pron {criptis auctore 
noninvito haberi poterunt. Que cum ita 
“Rock lectores cunéta xqui boniq; confil-
turos iperamus: & D. quoque Portam nos 
excufatos habiturum confidimus. Cum &
‘jure vulgo jam atypographis recepto ufi f1- 
mus:nec quicquam de confilioipfiusob ni-

Translation:

...also, I wish to advise the reader; be careful that you have certainty, do not remove the preface, for it helps in reading these books: so that perhaps they may also be useful to others. For if there are more diligent readers or those with greater abundance of leisure, or if Portam himself wishes otherwise, from his more certain knowledge these things may be obtained without invitation. These [prefaces] may thus be had contrary to the author's will. Since it is so, "I wish readers who are good and diligent to be found: and we trust that D. Portam will excuse us for this. As is commonly received by those accustomed to using these works; nor is there anything from the preface itself which prevents..."

[p.14]

PREFACE TO THE READER.

...also, I wish to advise the reader; be careful that you have certainty, do not remove the preface, for it helps in reading these books: so that perhaps they may also be useful to others. For if there are more diligent readers or those with greater abundance of leisure, or if Portam himself wishes otherwise, from his more certain knowledge these things may be obtained without invitation. These [prefaces] may thus be had contrary to the author's will. Since it

We can also use the distance of places. You kindly let this reader, and D. Porta if he wishes, enjoy these our works with good will, and forever.

AD [p.15]

the LECBOARES PR 4- FATIO AVCTORIS.
QED NS)\\ ur i C= Occafiofu

Lm YUH int OMINVCETUM LC- bus operis.
% te

ot a nere queda manu {cri-
SNe pla monumenta: ut ar-
cant guid ef abditi inde deprome-
rer: (ttame{emper ad hac propen-
(um natura tulit ) cum, nan femel
contigiffet in ob[curas quafdam no-
tas EF characteres impingere, qui-
bus [criptores dum legentibus invi-
dent rerum, cognitionems ex indu-
sifolia [ua fscripta occultare: ea
dimutt erefepenumero cogebar ,ad
Qua mags cupiditas animum,s ac-
cendevai. Verumcumea fit homi-
num condttio, ut que mutltum appe-
timus,eo ardentius appetamuus, quo
| adea alsequenda maior effe folet diff-
| Cultas: ea de caula factunr est ut
fubstinuerim non prius ab incapto

deft

/

a

i i "4 | ‘
\ r
FZ 4 | 4 ia
al i‘ a

[p.16]

PRAEFATIO

defisterer,quamomnes ejuf{modi no-
tas,que occurrerant,agno{cere in-
terpretarig, pofjem. Nec voto fortu-

na beneficium defutt:characterum

enim fignificationé accuratius per-
uirentt, €F in hocnon parum. ela-

al res usg, adeo felsciter cefat,

ut huic moxinguifitiont ferto addt-

étus ,non paucas eju{modt notasin-
terpretarer: quodcumde catero ali-
quandiu enix.us quafivifjems , ita
profect, ut collectis ejusinoat quam-
plurimis characteribus, cum multi-

» plex effet ratio interpretads, eg mul-
torum {criptorum collationer com-
probata,dezllis librum cofcribere de-
creverimn. Sed quomodo td fieret re-

ce , primu neq, ipsfestatis intelli eba.
, Rudimen- O uare Cir Ca 111t1a , Ut cy, ad
ee“ hoc oportuna collygerem qua libro for
mam tradercnt, mili labor futt non
MOAICUS

[p.17]

AVCTORIS.

Now I will translate this passage into clear, accurate modern English, preserving technical terms and reconstructing garbled words where necessary based on context:

We can also make use of the distance between places. You kindly allow this reader, and D. Porta if he wishes, to enjoy these our works with good will, and forever.

AD [p.15]

the LECBOARES PR 4- FATIO AVCTORIS.
QED NS)\\ ur i C= Occafiofu

Lm YUH int OMINVCETUM LC- bus operis.
% te

ot a nere queda manu {cri-
SNe pla monumenta: ut ar-
cant guid ef abditi inde deprome-
rer: (ttame{emper ad hac propen-
(um natura tul

— modest. Some observations on calamondin were made by a few, which they offered to memory from time to time, as needed; for it is very difficult to elaborate too much. For indeed, due to the great variety of opinions, this work would have arisen through continual excrement (i.e., effort/production). And if I had devoted more careful attention (what then is labor but?) to this matter, so that these notes on such a modest subject might be interpreted by those who ask for cryptic things, I would have excited among them my own admiration, lest the labors of others, which are not elsewhere, should be lacking in wonder at this art, or be deceived by some divine inspiration: so that the entire context and meaning, sought through orthography, will become clear to you. The author, from those things which I have gathered over these days, with a more serious mind for weightier matters, has undertaken to care for lighter studies; he has been compelled to publish them. For as many opinions as there are of men, so many objections are made regarding the zoological classifications, which [as ingenuous acumen in others' laborious efforts exposes] must be presented; books are emitted into the public domain: thus (readers humanly) this work I have kept before me for so long, until it was clamor from other authors, whose names appear in our Encyclopedia index, that it should be absolutely published. But with many more reasons necessary to change this conflict (I wish this fame of the work to increase), while it still is, partly, incited by the non-few exclamations of minds, which for a long time already have been operating in the service of the work CU- [p.19]

— AUTHOR,

Cupid's eagerness to undertake: ¢5 — 171 motus impulsi (i.e., impulses/motions) of things, which until now have been pertinent to this matter, honored this us in viewing; I gave convenience not to delay further, but diligently to edit the edition. We Veronese (or "Veronese" as a proper name?) deem this whole thing divided into two parts, & give tribute.

Translation:

— modest. Some observations on calamondin were made by a few, which they offered to memory from time to time, as needed; for it is very difficult to elaborate too much. For indeed, due to the great variety of opinions, this work would have arisen through continual effort (i.e., "excrement"). And if I had devoted more careful attention (what then is labor but?) to this matter, so that these notes on such a modest subject might be interpreted by those who ask for cryptic things, I would have excited among them my own admiration, lest the labors of others, which are not elsewhere, should be lacking in wonder at this art, or be deceived by some divine inspiration: so that the entire context and meaning, sought through orthography, will become clear to you. The author, from those things which I have gathered over these days, with a more serious mind for weightier matters, has undertaken to care for lighter studies; he has been compelled to publish them. For as many opinions as there are of men, so many objections are made regarding the zoological classifications, which [as ingenuous acumen in others' laborious efforts exposes] must be presented; books are emitted into the public domain: thus (readers humanly) this work I have kept before me for so long, until it was clamor from other authors, whose names appear in our Encyclopedia index, that it should be absolutely published. But with many more reasons necessary to change this conflict (I wish this fame of the work to increase), while it still is, partly, incited by the non-few exclamations of minds,

"videndus [that is, to signify secretly, in \"-0: «

it is signified through the first and fecundum, the second, the fourth book we give. Signs, by which we signify, vocal signs, fe- mivocalia, are mute, how they are made;

from the ancient [F] more recent ones. praeptibus, vifibilia, quaque vifum fugiant umver{o primo libro con-

{cripfimus, Scripta vero litera char-

| ta exarantt ,€5 qua interceptorem

eludant, que labore, quad, minime

interpretart poffunt: poftremo qua

20"

. ~~, 

[p.20]

PRAEFATIO AVCTORIS.

non folum inteligs ; [ed ne fufpicto- nem quidem infer ant fecundo libro

docuimus. ‘T ertio quomodo inter-

pretart [cripta debeat,exempladuo .

appofuimus unde lector reliqua va-

leat interpretart.. Demum quarto.

librotabulas 2 ba piimus,quarum.

auxilio verba facilius qua se repe-

rirtpofSint,ne pee facilitatis e5

diligentis husc negocio de

effe Vide VCtur.

[p.21]

+

IOAN. BAPTISTA:

PORTAE NEAPOLITANI DE

OccVLTIS LITERARYM
NOTSS.

.

e
a
,

LIBER PRIMYFVS.

| . seer,
Quid fint occulta feu furtive lite-

 varum note, -

Soa Ccviras feu furtivas 4 notas , + pegnitio,
ra 8 politioris literature viri eas li-

‘a \O teras appellant, que artificio

4 A huiufmodi confidz funt, ut

WA Nees A54 non pofsint ab alio, quam ab
WES 0, cui litere deftinantur, in-
terpretari. Quod fire&énobisanimadverfum

fuerit, id nomen literis illis congruere plané

videbimus, quas noftrates vulgo 6 z1FERASNO- 6 Zifere.

minant. Hasigitur furtiuas literas, si maiorum
noftrorum monumenta percurrentibus lice-

bit quicquam animo conie@urare, ¢ nil aliud ¢ 2. Definitio.
nifi notas efle dicemus, quibus vel occulté vel

breuiter aliquid rei gnaris, quibus rem explo-
ratam volumus, manifeftamus. Notas dverO ap-

Notaquid,
pellamus, quod literas, fyllabas, & dictiones,"

Let me reconstruct the garbled parts with scholarly care:

- "vidernus [ieilicet occulte fignificare, in\»-0" → "videndus [that is, to signify secretly, in \"-0"
- "eg fignificata perciperer unt primum eg fecundum ,alterttertium,s" → "it is signified through the first and fecundum, the second," (the "s" likely a misprint for comma)
- "¢@9 quartum librumdedimus." → "the fourth book we give."
- "Signa, quibus fignificamus,vocalia,fe- mivocalia,es muta,quomodo fiant;" → "Signs, by which we

If I understand correctly, the passage says that with the letters placed before the cipher keys and reading the signs of the meanings, we must recover the knowledge; what is done is that they are called notaries. What their use is, we explain through these matters: to conceal them, so that they are not discovered by explorers, notaries, or those who might find them in opportune places (for the hands of kings and princes are often used to intercept them, reveal their hidden meanings, and in the most favorable times, daringly dare to use them for our purpose). Therefore, with caution we proceed. Besides this brief statement about brevity, which I suppose refers to a liquid—of whatever kind it may be—it must be noted that frequent repetition of the words, with less effort, will allow us to grasp whatever is needed in these matters; indeed, many ingenious devices were devised for this purpose, and we shall soon present more commentary on them in suitable places.

CAPVT

[p.23]

LIBER PRIVS
4 GA PYR FL
What is hidden or stolen here, these notes are used,
they make the secret (cripferunt).

Translation:

If I understand correctly, the passage says that with the letters placed before the cipher keys and reading the signs of the meanings, we must recover the knowledge; what is done is that they are called notaries. What their use is, we explain through these matters: to conceal them, so that they are not discovered by explorers, notaries, or those who might find them in opportune places (for the hands of kings and princes are often used to intercept them, reveal their hidden meanings, and in the most favorable times, daringly dare to use them for our purpose). Therefore, with caution we proceed. Besides this brief statement about brevity, which I suppose refers to a liquid—of whatever kind it may be—it must be noted that frequent repetition of the words, with less effort, will allow us to grasp whatever is needed in these matters; indeed, many ingenious devices were devised for this purpose, and we shall soon present more commentary on them in suitable places.

CAPVT

[p.23]

LIBER PRIVS
4 GA PYR FL
What is hidden or stolen here, these notes are used,
they make the secret (cripferunt).

From Egypt from the priests themselves, as Tacitus says, truly sacred and mysterious rites were preserved, which they alone possessed. These involved secret signs and characters contained in the text, by means of which invisible things through visible things are signified, so that it is not forbidden to easily entrust them to common and ignoble people, so that they may be violated by the common rabble. From these letters were derived the common writings, which all perished, which were called sacred rites, kept privately by parents as priestly rites; also the Egyptian example was used; indeed, all colonists were thought to have used it. They also used figures of this kind, whose origin is Sicilian.

Not interpreting hieroglyphs written in this way now, they testified that these marks originated from the mysteries of sacred things, which were handed down by Cheremonis, who said that the remoter things were deciphered from hieroglyphic signs. But those who have attempted to interpret them have fallen into madness (*), believing that animal figures represent mental states (*).

From the opinion of Aliorii they began to express Egyptian symbols, not yet using the most common round symbol for opium.

* — £OA' sig . ¢ Polydor. Vir- licerara & {cripturz rationemextitifie. Verum sil deinvdroe

sic mos hic fcribendi antiquifsimis temporib? rera lib 1, cap.

invaluit, ut f vetuftatis monumenta omniain Marcellin. lic,

columnis, quein Minervz, aliorumq; Deoru ¢4 Exempium

templis erant pofitz, huiufmodi notis figna- ‘eu te%imonia

‘ , inscriptionum

rentur: cuius modi columnas multas fuifle ab quarundam.

=

Hermete Trismegistus (cryptas g lamblichus ¢ Pe myterijs.

: : * : 5.Exemphim

alijque teftantur, Legitur etiam 4 Mercurius feriptora Mer-

Deificam viam & anagogicam ad divina hiero- mot Trifme-

Aa glyphi-°™

[p.24]

---

Modern English translation:

From Egypt the priests themselves preserved truly sacred and mysterious rites, which they alone possessed. These involved secret signs and characters contained in the text, by means of which invisible things are signified through visible things; thus it was not forbidden to easily entrust them to common and ignoble people, so that they might be violated by the common rabble. From these letters were derived the common writings, which all perished, which were called sacred rites, kept privately by parents as priestly rites; also the Egyptian example was used — indeed, all colonists were thought to have employed it. They also used figures of this kind, whose origin is Sicilian.

Not interpreting hieroglyphs in this manner now, they testified that these marks originated from the mysteries of sacred things, which were handed down by Cheremonis, who said that remote matters are deciphered from hieroglyphic signs. But those who have attempted to interpret them have fallen into madness (*), believing that animal figures represent mental states (*).

From the opinion of Aliorii they began to express Egyptian symbols, not yet using the most common round symbol for opium.

* — £OA' sig . ¢ Polydor. Vir- licerara & {cripturz rationemextitifie. Verum sil deinvdroe

sic mos hic fcribendi antiquifsimis temporib? rera lib 1, cap.

invaluit, ut f vetuftatis monumenta omniain Marcellin. lic,

columnis, quein Minervz, alior

4 From Occult Literatures — »  
the deciphering of letters by glyphs which were later found among the Egyptian priests, whom they call Soindicates. This prophet was discovered by Ammon, king, as an example. In the case of Sefotridis 8, regarding the Semnoferni, who were in the Egyptian city of Rome and some others. He notes an interpretation added by Pliny and also reported by Strabo. And the Egyptians’ theology and angels: “... divine wisdom of Musa, that they may follow, ... to be initiated. For thus they wrote this mystagogy in the last book, so as to universalize nature and imitate the architected form of the gods, their mystical and hidden intelligence, which even today depict symbolic images through signs, and even the most ancient elements of antiquity are still seen on immovable axes; I once intended to interpret these qualities, but here the Phoenician sentence Lucan briefly says: ‘The Phoenicians first: fame is believed that they signify with red substances a deceptive voice in figures,’ and they do not yet mix the books of Memphis with water. They knew that only the ox and the ram were sacrificed, magical animals spoke languages. 8 Example: We also found this among the Magi of Gersefin Athens. We saw how they sought knowledge from use and common reading so that each might be seen in Honorio Thebano and others. 9 It could be that Apuleius mentions in his notes from the mysteries of Isis. He brings forward whatever books he knows, ignorant of the metamorphosis of things, partly through animal concepts suspended by means of words, partly through knots, and in this way.

[p.25]

— bus dcuriofitate prophanort leGione munita.
| J
| V ritasin promptu effet, fibivulgares notas tarum,
-berent:&%¢ Ciceronis ztateab anagnoftis epi- « = Exemplum
tarcha etiamlegimus ex Catonis orationibus fingulare.
- Czxfarisfententiam habuit,.hoc modo excepta,

Interpretation:

4 From Occult Literatures — »  
the deciphering of letters by glyphs which were later found among the Egyptian priests, whom they call Soindicates. This prophet was discovered by Ammon, king, as an example. In the case of Sefotridis 8, regarding the Semnoferni, who were in the Egyptian city of Rome and some others. He notes an interpretation added by Pliny and also reported by Strabo. And the Egyptians’ theology and angels: “... divine wisdom of Musa, that they may follow, ... to be initiated. For thus they wrote this mystagogy in the last book, so as to universalize nature and imitate the architected form of the gods, their mystical and hidden intelligence, which even today depict symbolic images through signs, and even the most ancient elements of antiquity are still seen on immovable axes; I once intended to interpret these qualities, but here the Phoenician sentence Lucan briefly says: ‘The Phoenicians first: fame is believed that they signify with red substances a deceptive voice in figures,’ and they do not yet mix the books of Memphis with water. They knew that only the ox and the ram were sacrificed, magical animals spoke languages. 8 Example: We also found this among the Magi of Gersefin Athens. We saw how they sought knowledge from use and common reading so that each might be seen in Honorio Thebano and others. 9 It could be that Apuleius mentions in his notes from the mysteries of Isis. He brings forward whatever books he knows, ignorant of the metamorphosis of things, partly through animal

- briefly {many ciphers comprehended, excepting

' Larepern Primvs. 5
rotx tortuofis,capreolatimd; condenfis apici-

Cae wor LI,
uod bis etiam notis fcribunt, qut Hac de re rur-
velint compendiose fcribere. fusinfr. Pe

ETeRes 4 quogue, utin{cribendo cele- 4. Genus Ve-
teri ufus no-

quafdam prefiguratuntexarbitrio,uccum bin & -1nSenara. |
fenatd adeffent, illis uli fic brevitatis causa (cri-

ftolz &orationes{cribebantur, nt ne verbum 8"
quidé excideret; & quicquid per contentioné
in judicijs dicerent , librarij complures, vel
amanuenfes exciperent.Eos auté hisnominib*
vocabant,quora minifterio Amanibus ureban-
tur, idq;: diverfis interfe partibus. d Apud Plu- 42.Exemplum

.

iilam,.quam is in coniuratos Catiline contra

&ad fuaufq;tempora fervatafolam ficextarese ¢ 3 Exempla,
fic& fenatorum fententias, dum recitarentur 7

fuilfe;f Nec folum in senatu sed etiam in scholis f 2. 1 (cholis,
‘olim pleraq; di@abatur discipulsexcipienda,

--itaut,licet incomodeé,notulis tamen & linea-

mentiscompendiosé fcriberent. Et Suetonius

refert ¢ Titum quoque Vefpafianum pluribus ¢ Exemplum

notis verba excipere velocifsimé folitii more *“*

notariorum./ Vt celeriter quog, verbacom- 4 1. genus Si-

‘prehenderent nominum verborum4; primas 8! 5
As literas

[p.26]

¢ Anctores
quidam no-
tarum.

1. Ennius,

2. Tyro.

$. Philarg.
4. Aquila.

gs. Seneca.

| & 3 Inconyi-

}

6 De Occrv tr. Lit. Non

---

Translation:

- briefly {many ciphers comprehended, excepting

' Larepern Primvs. 5
rotx tortuofis, capreolatimd; condenfis apici-

Cae wor LI,
uod bis etiam notis fcribunt, qut Hac de re rur-
velint compendiose fcribere. fusinfr. Pe

ETeRes 4 quogue, utin{cribendo cele- 4. Genus Ve-
teri ufus no-

quafdam prefiguratuntexarbitrio,uccum bin & -1nSenara. |
fenatd adeffent, illis uli fic brevitatis causa (cri-

ftolz &orationes{cribebantur, nt ne verbum 8"
quidé excideret; & quicquid per contentioné
in judicijs dicerent , librarij complures, vel
amanuenfes exciperent.Eos auté hisnominib*
vocabant,quora ministerio Amanibus ureban-
tur, idq;: diverfis interfe partibus. d Apud Plu- 42

They marked letters, as is now found in these historical monuments; the Romans signified C R. O P means to carry... ABVC from the city, Sic PPPPESSSEVVVVVVVEFFF first father of the homeland departed, a false fable was made, he desired victory, subdued the forces of the city with iron, fire, hunger, and cold: as Valerius Probus's little book on interpreting Roman vows is seen to be read, which Petrus Diaconus greatly expanded. DILIA also wished to signify, from stone and yew, gold. These too are denoted by DT only. In this way he marked a thousand and a hundred signs. But Romez Tullius Tyro, the freedman of Cicero, in this manner found figures of prepositions and added this Perfannius Philargyrus and Aquila the freedman. Afterwards Lucius Annzus Seneca's son, of all things, said: I have added the number to five thousand. He also refers AElianus Spartian? to Constantine Augustum about Emperor Geta, a pleasant and urban comment, in which it is said that at banquets they used to do this: nine liters of yew, as often as one wished to imitate Lucullice; he frequently used this custom at banquets so that the meaning of these could be understood from the accompanying symbols: for it was possible to present peacocks, pigs, chickens, and pheasants at the meal, and then PPPP, if Farda, Fasianos, and Ficus, FFF (he wrote), with equal literary order other kinds of delicious foods were designated, Augustus wherever he was, by Suetonius, when /per CS (before that) it is said, to keep a certain amount of cold water in use, which

— ———
a

Pa Leer eer Leev's. | 7
was maintained for our use, the m eun- ™ *Etiaven -demaue Z chara&térem ex Greci$ mutuatum fuisie, nein {cribendoduplex SStediumafter- ret.n Erant & Romanornmpranomina notu- 34 fils per- lis * prxfcripta, utin numouis argenteis, & an- tinces |

Translation:

They marked letters, as is now found in these historical monuments; the Romans signified C R. O P means to carry... ABVC from the city, Sic PPPPESSSEVVVVVVVEFFF first father of the homeland departed, a false fable was made, he desired victory, subdued the forces of the city with iron, fire, hunger, and cold: as Valerius Probus's little book on interpreting Roman vows is seen to be read, which Petrus Diaconus greatly expanded. DILIA also wished to signify, from stone and yew, gold. These too are denoted by DT only. In this way he marked a thousand and a hundred signs. But Romez Tullius Tyro, the freedman of Cicero, in this manner found figures of prepositions and added this Perfannius Philargyrus and Aquila the freedman. Afterwards Lucius Annzus Seneca's son, of all things, said: I have added the number to five thousand. He also refers AElianus Spartian? to Constantine Augustum about Emperor Geta, a pleasant and urban comment, in which it is said that at banquets they used to do this: nine liters of yew, as often as one wished to imitate Lucullice; he frequently used this custom at banquets so that the meaning of these could be understood from the accompanying symbols: for it was possible to present peacocks, pigs, chickens, and pheasants at