But sometimes, not always, birds would intercept messages sent through the air by means of a table; in it they would carry letters with great speed, so that Herodotus says Artabazo & Ratio, as Timoxeno did, would send them as often as they wished. The chart itself was attached to the feet (fagitte complicata, aptatis infuper pennis, ad conititum locum cum fagitta mittebatut), a fanatic [likely 'fagotto' or similar] from Huc belonged to Cleonymus, king of the Lacedaemonians: to the F. ye. i=”, * a F a (garbled). The example of the king: Here Treezenem [perhaps 'Tigranes' or 'Theramenes'] was sent by ship to many cities and towns on both sides; he sent javelins (or perhaps 'fagittas' meaning arrows/bolts) with messages written on them, saying: I assert liberty of citizenship, and it happened that, while posting soldiers, he would turn the city over and destroy it. The ratio [reason] of Caesar, but hearing Cicerone's opposition from the Gauls for a long time, could not endure; the soldier who had tied an epistle to a javelin (or 'fagitta') sent it, and when it was discovered, they brought the epistle with Cicerone's guards in it; in it were the words: CICERO IS A TARGET. Expect the enemy suddenly, and he repelled the hosts in the engagement.

But one could see through birds that it might be profitable to have co-members, lumbars [possibly 'lumbrico' or 'lumbus' meaning perhaps 'swallows' or a type of bird], swallows, or other such birds domesticated, to carry liquid [perhaps 'liquidum' meaning messages] in another way; whenever it was necessary, they would translate [or convey] with their feet attached to the unci [possibly 'unci' meaning ounce or perhaps 'uncus' meaning hook/claw], and return, and thus deceive. These related ones will come back. Thus these messengers, swift, will sometimes indicate something by means of signs, during the day, on certain roads. The more so, Frontinus says, to Brutus, who was being besieged by Antonio [perhaps 'Antonius'], kept doves for a long time in the vicinity, as far as possible.

Translation:

But sometimes, not always, birds would intercept messages sent through the air by means of a table; in it they would carry letters with great speed, so that Herodotus says Artabazo & Ratio, as Timoxeno did, would send them as often as they wished. The chart itself was attached to the feet (fagitte complicata, aptatis infuper pennis, ad conititum locum cum fagitta mittebatut), a fanatic [likely 'fagotto' or similar] from Huc belonged to Cleonymus, king of the Lacedaemonians: to the F. ye. i=”, * a F a (garbled). The example of the king: Here Treezenem was sent by ship to many cities and towns on both sides; he sent javelins (or perhaps 'fagittas' meaning arrows/bolts) with messages written on them, saying: I assert liberty of citizenship, and it happened that, while posting soldiers, he would turn the city over and destroy it. The ratio [reason] of Caesar, but hearing Cicerone's opposition from the Gauls for a long time, could not endure; the soldier who had tied an epistle to a javelin (or 'fagitta') sent it, and when it was discovered

"to be sent forth in the midst of the month; they flew from the highest parts of buildings with great haste, and Brutus received them, and it became more certain that these were about secret matters, which is why he restored the food to its original state. Here

Pye M Plinius:

[p.198]

178 De Occult. Lit. Nor. ~
Pliny: No wall nor guard of secrecy, but also nets — Antonio had offered them for sale in the sky.

1s. Example, now sent with a messenger. /Explanation with one and the same day -

-» from Olympia Aegine Thaurofthenis the Gorgon's lair
it was announced to his parent, though others |
would bring fish and sea creatures: others also otherwise
Thaurofthené, when profiting, abducted a dove
4 young ones still with downy feathers and involucres,
which, when it grew up, wrapped itself in smoke
with the incense of fumigation toward the young

~ ~approaching each day Pisain Aeginanmyadvow-
m2. Eirund washed, to whom Aelianus was the author. m Nor did he forbid.
cap.2g. There are those who, among all things that live, keep
the young birds hidden in their homes to raise them,
» they also say that not only beyond the sea
Smentales. at the rising of doves, which through the middle
of the path of messengers serve as an office for the
tes, lords' letters {but in a short time long-sought-for.
Which the greenish one says, when he said.

,, just as from opposite sides of the world

Phe Anxia precipiti ventis et epiphylapenna, (>
es. Cornix, <o Memoria even in ancient histories
and monuments it was produced, AEgyptium regem fuifle Mharrhem nomine, who entirely educated the cornet [horn?] with ptero- phori, & curforis vice, whenever anything needed to be announced, he would stir it, namely from heaven plainly by composition of epistle, to which was necessary to pass over, carefully noting, to which impulse, where to trust, and sometimes

p So that it might be sufficient. pHechumanum ingenifai
ARS ad cayen-

|
|

[p.199]

a"

We need to translate into clear modern English, preserving technical terms (cipher names, plant/mineral names). OCR garbled words: we must reconstruct best scholarly.

Let's parse the Latin text with likely intended words:

"meenibus loco emittebar, illz lucis & cibiavi- dz altifsimis edificiorum partibus evolantes infidebant, easque Brutus excipiebat, ficque de rebus geftis certior fiebat, quare difpofito {emperlocisijsdem cibo revocabateas. Hine"

Probably: "mea in mens locum emittebar" maybe? Let's think.

Original Latin likely: "mea in loco emittebar"? Not sure.

Maybe it's about birds being released from nests ("meinibus" maybe "nidibus"?). "emittebar" = "would be sent forth". "illz lucis & cibiavi- dz altifsimis edificiorum partibus evolantes infidebant, easque Brutus excipiebat" Could be: "Illi lucis et cibis avidi, ex altissimis partibus aedificiorum evolantes, fidēbant, easque Brutus excipiebat". Hmm.

Let's try to reconstruct:

"me

The secret of the seventh seal is that which was hidden in the fibrous parts which he made; having been tempered by the same skill, it is irritated when struck with equal force. Opposing Christ, Ptolemy, since you have obstructed this matter with the dove, Saladin has determined to oppose him, urged so that fierce spirits may be present; I was present at the consecration, intercepted by us contrary to the opposite message, now diminished; from which it follows that, desperate for his aid, they expect nothing, and are making a surrender, in no way securing anything human, having plundered each other. And so this volume's matter has been extracted everywhere, nothing being found relating to it, except what is forced from industry itself: other things refer to it, which have been proven by the same proof; afterwards we shall give more force.

Now these are now rudimentary and entirely imperfectly struck, let us transfer them a third time.

_ End of the book of the seventh.

[p.200]

eTranfitio.

é Objection.

¢Concealment.

d Reason.

/

Example.

= to bind letters together, or things through diver-

 heal F

/ -

;

80

IOAN. ‘BAPTISTA
PORTAE NEAPOLITANI DE
OccvitTtis LitTrésERVM™M
: Ni Out tS | |
LIBER TERTIVS. | |,
PROEMIVM. |

Re

93 folium de toto opere videtur
my) est lequum, hoc volumine nn oe ~ prosequamur. 6Sedjamaudio
dicetaliquis: Vnde novus hic Apollo, vel Oc-
dipus,qui occultaanimi fen{a.& enodare znig-
mata profiteatur,emicuit?Divinipotius,quam

‘ humanieftingenij hominis interna perfcruta-

ri, parumd; feréinrer Deum, hominemque di-
{taret, siocclufas animora cogitationes intel-
le&tus aflequeretur humanus. clngenué fateor

multa esf pofie furtiva fcripta, que feinter=

pretaturum quemquam pollicert, furoremac
delirium plane exsistimarem. dQuotus enim

- quifque erit, qui hoc innumeris pené dolis,ac

infinita {eribendi multitudine citra infaniam
jaGare audeat? vt orthographiz ratio obser-
rinon queat, latentem aliquo modo fenfum

Translation:

The secret of the seventh seal is that which was hidden in the fibrous parts which he made; having been tempered by the same skill, it is irritated when struck with equal force. Opposing Christ, Ptolemy, since you have obstructed this matter with the dove, Saladin has determined to oppose him, urged so that fierce spirits may be present; I was present at the consecration, intercepted by us contrary to the opposite message, now diminished; from which it follows that, desperate for his aid, they expect nothing, and are making a surrender, in no way securing anything human, having plundered each other. And so this volume's matter has been extracted everywhere, nothing being found relating to it, except what is forced from industry itself: other things refer to it, which have been proven by the same proof; afterwards we shall give more force.

Now these are now rudimentary and entirely imperfectly struck, let us transfer them a third time.

_ End of the book of the seventh.

[p.200]

eTranfitio.

é Ob

"Can it be that he can emerge? if he is permitted, or if he is allowed to write according to the rule of the Gnostics from the arbitrators' table — 

if he has revealed the meaning of the signs, whose number will be interpreted by a prescriber — 

——— ee ee — ee

i i

[p.201]

Read Terrivs. 181

‘He was warned by the author not to have any kind of understanding, which {he might be able to possess}, unless he is accustomed not to nullify Cicero’s epistle to Atticus:

this kind will also be expressed even with one character, and other combinations, which no interpreter, who is intimate with the secrets of things, can explain; they seem to require an infinite amount, appear to need it. Therefore, among all authors we shall only interpret this volume in such a way that the ratio of letters and syllables may somehow be observed, whose various genera will demonstrate the true [meaning] from them, which more frequently use and are especially useful, and which are entangled with folly’s deceptive veils; thus we will approach Latin and vernacular languages, as it will be easier to accommodate, for whom, having known the reason of letters and the context of syllables, the reader, with a certain familiarity, may easily attain knowledge, while others may find it difficult. But before their tradition, which is so full of absurdity as an interpreter should be, and which we shall explain how he might avoid error.

aA eV TOOL

Let the interpreter of the signs, whatever he may be,

of this place and of a good and absolute [knowledge] in

: as i - _ interpretisconditiones doceamns, vt ftatim j.. seneris (cri
cognofcatur, quicarum omnino expers fit, ad prorum requi-
hocnon facilé perferri, &proinde quo magis “
ijs’erit innixus, ed dexterius & felicius in hac
doGtina profeQurus. bin primisitaque acue 4,, tigenij
tifsimumeum naturaeffe expedit, vt fiingenij acumen.
preitantia mulcum in vniverfis disci-
plinisad-

M 3 ferat

[p.202]

_—— ————————
ie
By

os pofsit oftentare, vt, quod proverbijloco
vsurpatur, Quemadmodum aurum igni pro-"

---

Let me reconstruct the garbled parts carefully:

First part: "pofsit eruere? ehuiuf{modierit, fiquis preter" → likely "posset eruere? si eius modi fuerit, si quis praeter..." (Can he emerge? if of his kind he were, or if anyone beyond...)

Then: "fcribendi normam diGiones ex arbitrioad fi-" → "scribendi normam Gnosticorum ex arbitrorum tabula" (writing according to the rule of the Gnostics from the arbitrators' table) — "diGiones" is clearly "Gnosticorum", "arbitrioad" is "arborum" or "arbitrorum" but context suggests "tabula" so probably "ex arbitrorum tabula"

Next: ",, favocabula fignificaverit, quorum nifi inter- pres" → likely "favicabula signa significaverit, quorum numerus interpres" (if he has revealed the meaning of the signs, whose number [is] interpreted by a prescriber)

Then: "——— ee ee — ee i

(§ Solertia. Let iron appear. § Besides this, it is fitting to anyone who has demonstrated singular diligence and skill in the matter, that all negligent arts are subject to him so that his soul may easily go around among enemies, infidels, and frauds, to devise plans, penetrate secrets, avoid them, and with all vigilance strive to love them. Thus modest talent of discipline appears to require this faculty of true ingenium, which the free and perfect ingenium always possesses in itself; and those who destroy it are, I think, far from admiring acumen, and truly calling it genius, so that it may easily be applied to all disciplines.

Therefore Peritia seems to exist in many ways. Therefore it is fitting for such a person not only to instruct, but first of all in many things, especially arms, matters, and especially military affairs; so that the true expert knowledge may be accustomed to hasten enemies and avoid them, and thus linguistically it may be able.

§ Let this accede to many. § Many agree, whose expertise is preferred, which more can be used, and with peoples commerce may be possible, of whatever kind it is. Grammarians, [those] of the idiom, let this cryptic [text] be interpreted. But besides orthography, letters, syllables, and context of speech, no expert at all is fitting, since in the first place folly effervesces.

FUT., boils; also in mathematical disciplines ingenium.

62 De Ocevir Liranone © 9 i feratadjumenti,in hac precipué arte fuas vires”

F

: i ll es _

[p.203]

Translation:

(§ Solertia. Let iron appear. § Besides this, it is fitting to anyone who has demonstrated singular diligence and skill in the matter, that all negligent arts are subject to him so that his soul may easily go around among enemies, infidels, and frauds, to devise plans, penetrate secrets, avoid them, and with all vigilance strive to love them. Thus modest talent of discipline appears to require this faculty of true ingenium, which the free and perfect ingenium always possesses in itself; and those who destroy it are, I think, far from admiring acumen, and truly calling it genius, so that it may easily be applied to all disciplines.

Therefore Peritia seems to exist in many ways. Therefore it is fitting for such a person not only to instruct, but first of all in many things, especially arms, matters, and especially military affairs; so that the true expert knowledge may be accustomed to hasten enemies and avoid them, and thus linguistically it may be able.

§ Let this accede to many. § Many agree, whose expertise is preferred, which more can be used, and with peoples commerce may be possible, of whatever kind it is. Grammarians, [those] of the idiom, let this cryptic [text] be interpreted. But besides orthography, letters, syllables, and context of speech, no expert at all is fitting, since in the first place folly effervesces.

FUT., boils; also in mathematical disciplines ingenium.

62 De Ocevir Liranone © 9 i feratadjumenti,in hac precipué arte fuas vires”

F

: i ll es _

[p.203]

Lreexe Tertivs 183
rium. gIn orthographialoquor de exquisfita, s Cometic. 1,
& abfoluta {cribendiratione,tametfinon adeo
orthographizconfidendum(ir, venon debear
experiri, vtrunvilla fit omiffa, quod ex indu-
ftria poflet evenire, Atfimultas exquisfité lin-
= uas percallere nimis arduum videretur, lati-
nis faltrem literisvfitinftruGus, tam quod ea
lingua vtcunqueadeohac tempeßtate commu,
nis eft.vt ferénon minus viitata; quim.omni-
bus vernacula fit,tam quod eacommoditsad
cautionem admittitur. Sunt & alia fortafle,
quorum non ignarum eum esfle expediat, pro
rerum yarietate, quz pofientevenire. bSedad Speman, eg
hecpottremoadditur peculiaris noftri operis feu pas
vfus,vtquacuta& diligentiaisin{cripti inter- brorum.
pretatione effe debeat, & fe quo pao in opere
moderetur intelligat. ¢ Girca hecmens & cui ‘7- Cura & ats
ta nequaquam obitabris queritur, vt obiter °°"
feriptidolusexpendatur,fed maxima attentio,
fummagque diligentia, vtanimus ab omni cura
&cogitatione vacuus, omnibus poftpofitisin
eafolum re indagandaeclaboret,vt omnem co-
natum conftituat>s knon tamen fires intenfio-
4Corettio.
rem aliquandocuram,& tempusexpofcit,con-
tinua attentio, & in ea mens nimis anxic
torquenda: /Nimia enim diligentia, & diutur-
‘1. Ratio.
nus mentis labor ftuporem ingerit, vt minus
pofteaad hec ingeniu habile fit, & nihil profi-
Ciat. m Morbos praterea maxime conciliat, & as.
Ratia.
maior {fepenumero ex métis conatib.¢egritudo,
quam excorporislaboribus folet proyenire,vt
mihi, fi quado in perplexiores notasincideba,
M 4 int¢et~

[p.204]

—EEEE—x—<™ —-”- -.

-_

n Doli {pecies
primo omni

inveitiganda,

'*

aObservatio-
nesead rem
pertinentes.

pAbftrufi fen-
fas inveitiga-
tid.

184 © De Occvir. Lit Nor.
interprerandi {xpé contigit: cuitoto feré dic
in hiscon{umpto, vix feptima vebo@ava hora

prateriifle videbatur, vt vefperam nonnifiper

---

Translation:

Lreexe Tertivs 183
rium. gIn orthographialoquor de exquisfita, s Cometic. 1,
& abfoluta {cribendiratione,tametfinon adeo
orthographizconfidendum(ir, venon debear
experiri, vtr

darkness, and to recognize the offspring of light,
from which one must withdraw long attention; as if a man afflicted by apoplexy, foolish and immobile, so that Diogenes, gazing fixedly at the sun, would seem 'to remain'; where labor will be in another time, different from suitable hours, so that business may be carried out at an opportune moment. %
Truly, in these difficulties must be untangled. Neither should it easily be recognized, for trade is hindered by labor, when ignorance of the art of concealment can bring forth no other remedy than the physician's example, to whom darkness first becomes apparent on the body; health is then restored from fruit. From this we would have to know the nature of the difficulty, legitimate life is in these places; here observations should be conveyed in this volume, from which any interpreter of hidden difficulties may draw: let us not despise it, in which the greater part of difficulty consists, but rather perfect it thoroughly. Having recognized the nature of the secret, in every possible way and with effort he will elaborate it, so that from the root all senses are referred, nor earlier than necessary, but rather late by revealed cunning, so as to irritate efforts, so that what is hidden may appear perfected in consultation.
The place was suitable, so that some literary disputes might arise; But since they do not insist on anything yet to be said by the interpreter, we first propose. ~ Capvt

4
)

[p.205]

Liser Terrivs.
Cra vers EL

ue novifse interpretem conveniat , Ante-

quam ad [criptiimterpretationem accedat.

185

: } apenas {cripti interpretandi regulas tradi-+
turo, operz pretium videtura rudimentis,
- queadid aditumprettant, & multi conferre
videntur,;nontamen omnino neceflariaaufpi-
cari,ut nihil,quod ad optimi interpretis inftte
tutionem f{pectare pofsit, omiflum esflevidea-
tur. 2 Primumitaq; proficiet idiomatis {cripti j,vepigatic.

notitiam habere. Diverfis enim modis omnes

loquuntur, & fscriptum contexunt, eadem res

Translation:

darkness, and to recognize the offspring of light,
from which one must withdraw long attention; as if a man afflicted by apoplexy, foolish and immobile, so that Diogenes, gazing fixedly at the sun, would seem 'to remain'; where labor will be in another time, different from suitable hours, so that business may be carried out at an opportune moment. %
Truly, in these difficulties must be untangled. Neither should it easily be recognized, for trade is hindered by labor, when ignorance of the art of concealment can bring forth no other remedy than the physician's example, to whom darkness first becomes apparent on the body; health is then restored from fruit. From this we would have to know the nature of the difficulty, legitimate life is in these places; here observations should be conveyed in this volume, from which any interpreter of hidden difficulties may draw: let us not despise it, in which the greater part of difficulty consists, but rather perfect it thoroughly. Having recognized the nature of the secret, in every possible way and with effort he will elaborate it, so that from the root all senses are referred, nor earlier than necessary, but rather late by revealed cunning, so as to irritate efforts, so that what is hidden may appear perfected in consultation.
The place was suitable, so that some literary disputes might arise; But since they do not insist on anything yet to be

For indeed among the Hispanians, Germans, Italians, and others of distant regions, it is otherwise said and expressed in different ways; they do not understand each other, unless by some remote means of speech that is entirely different, since even true expression has many varied modes of utterance. For various German, Irish, and Spanish peoples speak and pronounce differently, as their pronunciation certainly differs, so that speech and (cryptography) necessarily become diverse.

For if the Hebrews, Spaniards, or Germans pronounce words, we who are accustomed to hear Neapolitans, how many divine distinctions appear between our language and theirs, which even God Himself would see with great difficulty in uttering foreign words with such care, lest by inserting the spirit of a parent he add difficulty, so that it may be said: let it be done carefully; for thus it is shown.

The Dalmatian [or Dalmat] before the fifth syllable begins, as they pronounce VLaDisravs with one spirit;

M — which

[p.206]

136 De Occvtt. Lrt. Nor. —

— that from us, if not having absolute knowledge of idioms,

should be brought forth and (not) be able to explain German ciphers.

The Spaniards, however, pronounce in the heel of their feet as if S$ (perhaps a symbol or abbreviation), so that their word is not repeated, but rather something else occurs. The Appulita pronounce, as many begin with $C at the place I (possibly a reference to position or letter), and they do not wish to bring forth (or utter) it, peace be upon them (a phrase possibly corrupted); if St. Anne (perhaps a corruption of "St. Anna") cries out, & to know. Neither let foreign nations be added, such as those whose great distance is determined by the day's end and nearness & agnates; for in proclamation, & cryptography between differing things is carried out; people speak, and the order and composition of syllables is.

Thus we speak with cognates and relatives using words, which the Italians, as the Latins say, Florentines, or even Avignon (or "in Oconverso" — possibly a corruption) pronounce, while the Venetians change V in L: thus from others are numbered. And there are distinctions & family names among many, different and corrupted.

Thus Sicilians [perhaps "Siculi" with a diminutive suffix] have small (or little) [words?], Lacovellvm (possibly a name or term), Serpem (serpent?), and Hieronym!

[p.206]

Translation:

For indeed among the Hispanians, Germans, Italians, and others of distant regions, it is otherwise said and expressed in different ways; they do not understand each other, unless by some remote means of speech that is entirely different, since even true expression has many varied modes of utterance. For various German, Irish, and Spanish peoples speak and pronounce differently, as their pronunciation certainly differs, so that speech and (cryptography) necessarily become diverse.

For if the Hebrews, Spaniards, or Germans pronounce words, we who are accustomed to hear Neapolitans, how many divine distinctions appear between our language and theirs, which even God Himself would see with great difficulty in uttering foreign words with such care, lest by inserting the spirit of a parent he add difficulty, so that it may be said: let it be done carefully; for thus it is shown.

The Dalmatian [or Dalmat] before the fifth syllable begins, as they pronounce VLaDisravs with one spirit;

M — which

[p.206]

136 De Occvtt. Lrt. Nor. —

—

They say, and other peoples also bring many such things which are not found by mere chance or by learned men alone; it is fitting to add a number, as in the common phrase, which is common among different nations, though differing in form. For the variety of peoples is found here. Pontanus notes that we should often speak about the differences of things and the diversity of peoples, not so much varying in speech itself, but rather in the power of letters themselves.

[...]

Listerus Terius. 187

in another way, and to have it in another manner; and here we use it. Nor is it proper for this to be done in different nations and peoples, even though at the same time in different states and times such diverse and various scripts are used, and also words are changed. Therefore, ignorance of the idiom cannot serve as an interpreter either when speaking or writing, since neither can it extract meaning from a script, since, being ignorant of it, one will be led astray by false interpretation.

For this reason, it is little use for the knowledge of the script's genius to be known to the interpreter, unless he also recognizes the art of reading; not little benefit is thought to be derived from this. Often it happens that a certain [script] is easily used by someone whose genius and ability in interpreting such a thing is present: just as, conversely, if such a subtle and cunning script is thought to have been made by a man of sharp mind and rude nature, yet with a subtler method, so that it might be sought out as hidden script; on the contrary, if it were rude and dull, contemptible in its writing precepts, and proceeding with a more lively spirit, then from this one would seek the discipline, mores, words, names, and formulas peculiar to man, hidden; the meaning of which, even though the interpreter recognizes not the art of reading, is thought not to be of little use.

Often it happens that what is done by genius for someone else's script and ability exists easily to be learned, when an unacquainted [script] becomes familiar.

[p.208]

4

183 De Occultis Literarum Notis

Translation:

They say, and other peoples also bring many such things which are not found by mere chance or by learned men alone; it is fitting to add a number, as in the common phrase, which is common among different nations, though differing in form. For the variety of peoples is found here. Pontanus notes that we should often speak about the differences of things and the diversity of peoples, not so much varying in speech itself, but rather in the power of letters themselves.

[...]

Listerus Terius. 187

in another way, and to have it in another manner; and here we use it. Nor is it proper for this to be done in different nations and peoples, even though at the same time in different states and times such diverse and various scripts are used, and also words are changed. Therefore, ignorance of the idiom cannot serve as an interpreter either when speaking or writing, since neither can it extract meaning from a script, since, being ignorant of it, one will be led astray by false interpretation.

For this reason, it is little use for the knowledge of the script's genius to be known to the interpreter, unless he also recognizes the art of reading; not little benefit is thought to be derived from this. Often it happens that a certain [script] is easily used by someone whose genius and ability in interpreting such a thing is present: just as, conversely, if such a subtle and cunning script is thought to have been made by a man of sharp mind and rude nature, yet with a subtler method, so that it might be sought out as hidden script; on the contrary, if it

Cognition of his name shall be understood, {of the cipher.

The core is to be sought for, and it will be found; from its knowledge it will be easier to derive the remainder of the cryptogram.

4. Reidequa ; MAES *\ fcribitur noti- Venabitur. d Ad hec traGatz rei & cognitio tia. accedit, quam & habere multum intererit, eamque poterit tim ex {cribentis, tumveius ad , quem fscritur negotijs , vel utriusque‘come S>* mercionancifci. e Ratio eft, quod cégnita ma-

* Kato. teria, facillimé communia verba; quz ad eam:

rem {pe€tantinterpres poterit conijcere,quod pro unoquoquecorum locorum verbo ex cha-

raGerum numero, fimilitudine, &difsimilitu-

dine in fuis locis obser vata, non multo cum la bore cognofcetur : fietque interdum, ut una agnita fsyllaba, ne dicam verbo ,decetero pari negotij futurum fit. Nam totius inde {cripti ex earum literarii proditione in alijs verbis dolus fExemplum. detegetur. f Exemplicaufafi de belloresagi- tur, literarum numerus eius verbi, vel ahorum -adeandem rem facientiam quaretur, quod eiuf{modi verbum haberi pofsit, in quoeadem litera geminetur, comodius id effe poterit, obfervato repetitz litere ordine,ut res certior interpretationis non fruftrate fecuritaté pre- flet,que geminatio fj plurjmum literara fuerit, e0 magis proderit. Verum literarum humerus in latino {cripto circa casuum flexd variandus eft: In unaquaque materia plura erunt verba communia, quz eam quafi neceflarid confe- quuntur,ut in amore. AMOR, COR, IGNIS&, FLAMMA,VRI, ViTa,MORS, MISERATIO, & Szvitia, locihabent:&, in bello Mixes, DY¥xX,

mh.
CEO OO ——— SS a —-—SO rl hoo —————_

[p.209]

=“

tam {cripturam ad interpretationem non pa-

Lizsern Terrivs. 189
Dvx, IMPERATOR, CASTRA, ARMA, Py-

cNwaRe, & huiufmodi reliqua. Huc accedent |

--- End of Latin passage ---

Now translating into clear modern English:

"Cognition of his name shall be understood, {of the cipher.

The core is to be sought for, and it will be found; from its knowledge it will be easier to derive the remainder of the cryptogram.

4. Reidequa ; MAES *\ fcribitur noti- Venabitur. d Ad hec traGatz rei & cognitio tia. accedit, quam & habere multum intererit, eamque poterit tim ex {cribentis, tumveius ad , quem fscritur negotijs , vel utriusque‘come S>* mercionancifci. e Ratio eft, quod cégnita ma-

* Kato. teria, facillimé communia verba; quz ad eam:

rem {pe€tantinterpres

And the words that have been deflected, and one of these recognized as a word not with much labor in many ways of speaking, and finally to refer it to cryptic notation, and thus more readily grasp its meaning, vocal distinction, consonant distinction, and other interpretive effort.

It will not be little help, nor the author's note, or peritio (interpretation) by hand in {crypt}, for if intercepted entirely in {crypt} or by someone who does not know how to mark the method of notation, it will easily become such that in a disturbed {crypt} all means of interpreting are obstructed, certainly so that things themselves, whether transposed, or exchanged, placed apart, or arranged at random, or mixed, or the intervals of words retained, or their parts inserted, or otherwise manipulated by some trick, the interpreter will not be able to disturb it, sometimes easily deceiving.

Therefore I will gather this matter in few points: idiomatic {cry} (perhaps "scripta" or "written form"), and that to which it is written, and the material from which the knowledge of it is taken, and we say that it can help to find solutions, though as stated, not entirely necessary, but to fit it as well as possible.

There are also others, which even the interpreter would wish to omit, since they are no longer prolix, we leave them out.

Carv

g s-Ipfias Au-
tographi in-
fpectio feri-
pturave folers
& cmendata,

[p.210]

¢ Noutherus li-

De Occvir. Lit. Nor,

“Chae vor TELS eee
| Diftinita literarum nomina, quibus am fepenumero {uu oportune locis ute debenius.

190

“>
i

T) Rimam itaqueliterarum difcrimina ftate-
mus, & nova quedamijs indita nomina de-
Clarabimus,quibusfzpein{criptis perferutan-
dis utemur: cum enim nova eflenc, qua {tri-
benda erant, novis etiam vocabulis appellan-

da effe visa funts hzc tamen obiter percutres —

mus, nam de liceris fubtilius difputare, alte-
rius eflet facultatis & temporis, nede furtivis
literarum notis interpretandis precepta tra-

_. _. dens, grammaticam videar profteti. De literis-
#Eneraquid. tra@aturi: 4 Literam compofitz vocis pattem

Translation:

"Chae vor TELS eee | The names of letters distinguished, which we must use appropriately in suitable places.

We will distinguish the differences and peculiarities of letters, and invent new appropriate names for them, which we shall use in {crypts} as before: for though the new thing, which was to be handled, is also called by new words, yet incidentally it strikes through — for it is more subtle to dispute about the letters, requiring greater skill and time, and there are no precepts for interpreting secret writings, dense, so that grammar may appear useful. De literis-#Eneraquid. tra@aturi: 4 Letters composed from the voice pattern"

Reconstructed Latin (correcting OCR):

"Chae vor TELS eee | The names of letters distinguished, which we must use appropriately in suitable places.

We will distinguish the differences and peculiarities of letters, and invent new appropriate names for them, which we shall use in {crypts} as before: for though the new thing, which was to be handled, is also called by new words,

We use the smallest [letters], namely A, B, C. Nor does any other person alter it, if sometimes in letters a word is substituted for

the element. 6 by means of an element, since that which among ancient grammarians was used as a cipher for things,

and indifferently permits: From this I wish to say that the letter and the element, when separated in saying what is signified, may be expressed in either way. Thus, from where we draw out smoke, we return:

the letters with which we write are one and twenty. ABCDEFGHI_

LMNOPQRSTVXZ. But H rather than a mark of aspiration

than the letter. We reject K 2

beforehand and thirdly already rejected, for as Diomedes says, that we move above vacuity, and in {the lines} only truly Latin letters are found, Saulius first

— = — [p.211]

Ligur Tertius. The first Roman letter said that to make a distinction of two sounds the letters H and Q were needed.

Which no one should have faith about, none of which should be used by us: since we care entirely about the initials in Greek. Which if sometimes we admit the use of Greek words among Greek letters, annotate it as fateful Greek letters. Q, some from the number of letters, and not to be used from the throat, because often V is pronounced before another vowel in the same syllable. Also Greek Y is ours: let us expunge its fateful notation from its sound, for the sound is indeed a character common to all.

X & Z we place, which among the ancients this was more frequent in use: we, since we make words of both, must remember their two.

Translation:

We use the smallest [letters], namely A, B, C. Nor does any other person alter it, if sometimes in letters a word is substituted for

the element. 6 by means of an element, since that which among ancient grammarians was used as a cipher for things,

and indifferently permits: From this I wish to say that the letter and the element, when separated in saying what is signified, may be expressed in either way. Thus, from where we draw out smoke, we return:

the letters with which we write are one and twenty. ABCDEFGHI_

LMNOPQRSTVXZ. But H rather than a mark of aspiration

than the letter. We reject K 2

beforehand and thirdly already rejected, for as Diomedes says, that we move above vacuity, and in {the lines} only truly Latin letters are found, Saulius first

— = — [p.211]

Ligur Tertius. The first Roman letter said that to make a distinction of two sounds the letters H and Q were needed.

Which no one should have faith about, none of which should be used by us: since we care entirely about the initials in Greek. Which if sometimes we admit the use of Greek words among Greek letters, annotate it as fateful Greek letters. Q, some from the number of letters, and not to be used from the throat, because often V is pronounced before another vowel in the same syllable. Also Greek Y is ours: let us expunge its fateful notation from its sound, for the sound is indeed a character common to all.

X & Z we place, which among the ancients this was more frequent in use: we, since we make words of both, must remember their two.

But these, the grammarians also dispute,
for they seem to have little relevance to the purpose of our work, so that we may explain the partition of letters: 4 Letters thus; we divide the first number ¢ Letter into consonants and vowels. Vowels are A, E, I, O, U, which are said to have a full, absolute voice: the rest, all consonants, since they sound with vowels, and by themselves cannot produce voices.

6 Hence all, except Z, in respect of semivocalics and mutas we divide: Semivocals can be seven FLMNRSX, these have all 4 "ationem. They begin with a strong (cali) and end within; as most Latinists preferred the mute letters,

: when

[p.212]

: 192 De Occvret. Lur.’Nor.

that which is semivocal I think we should refer to very little. But mutas, which begin in vowels, are BCDGPQT, and they are called mutas because they have a slight voice; the sounds of mutas seem to imitate. With liquid semivowels there are four LMNR3; besides these from them. Now let us return to the matter.

¢ Consonants also are doubled, either

2. When the conjunction is placed. 3 ; that simples are put. That in the syllable nexu (connection) they can be joined, these are: BCD FGLMNPRST & Z, the last in vulgar usage is doubled. _, which cannot be joined to the syllable

HQxX func .d R surf cons nonium aliquzin collocationem A Ce” 4" te ss - , indi@ionibus. finibus, alique vero in initijs & medijs, Finales a he BCDLMNRSTX efile cum vocalibus, -teli- 44 When they are placed in the remaining places they can. Also

; besides this assignation of consonants we divide into two parts. Namely in frequent and less frequent, more and less rare.

Frequent we call those which occur more frequently,

rare those which occur less often in (cryptic) speech. Frequent ones are CFMN, more frequent LRST, rare DGHP, rarest BOXZ.S ed ne me aliquis diGtis carpat, that the rarest of these I would call, which more often {cryptoin-

Quattzh- cerveniunt, velexadverfo. / Letters frequent-

Translation:

But these, the grammarians also dispute,
for they seem to have little relevance to the purpose of our work, so that we may explain the partition of letters: 4 Letters thus; we divide the first number ¢ Letter into consonants and vowels. Vowels are A, E, I, O, U, which are said to have a full, absolute voice: the rest, all consonants, since they sound with vowels, and by themselves cannot produce voices.

6 Hence all, except Z, in respect of semivocalics and mutas we divide: Semivocals can be seven FLMNRSX, these have all 4 "ationem. They begin with a strong (cali) and end within; as most Latinists preferred the mute letters,

: when

[p.212]

: 192 De Occvret. Lur.’Nor.

that which is semivocal I think we should refer to very little. But mutas, which begin in vowels, are BCDGPQT, and they are called mutas because they have a slight voice; the sounds of mutas seem to imitate. With liquid semivowels there are four LMNR3; besides these from them. Now let us return to the

"of divine nature

lately, I have written and will write about the ratios, either by nature or in some other way. From nature, since it often happens that cryptofilants occur, but from outside, when someone is firmly contained in a letter, so that with the power of LOVE, where AFTER FEELING, AH, HEY, and these are

the warm and rare ones, yet more of these and

[p.213]

Lreer TeRTrivs. — 193
and it is necessary to repeat this same thing again, for indeed if it happens,

nonexhoc F & H frequentissimas effe colligitur. The speech in the letter sometimes contains very frequent and rare ratios, and

rare ones are made frequent by these. Rarae flet & inter—"

Translation:

"of divine nature

lately, I have written and will write about the ratios, either by nature or in some other way. From nature, since it often happens that cryptofilants occur, but from outside, when someone is firmly contained in a letter, so that with the power of LOVE, where AFTER FEELING, AH, HEY, and these are

the warm and rare ones, yet more of these and

[p.213]

Lreer TeRTrivs. — 193
and it is necessary to repeat this same thing again, for indeed if it happens,

nonexhoc F & H frequentissimas effe colligitur. The speech in the letter sometimes contains very frequent and rare ratios, and

rare ones are made frequent by these. Rarae flet & inter—"