They will not be ten feGiones.
They will be able to make fePrem feprem fieri, &
one letter and twenty fint, so that three single letters.
cipiant, five bine, five tern of this alphabet's fint,
the same in one line, five superior, five inferior conjunctive
tur, or Quoquomodo inutraq;
"800 _... dinea.difponentur, |

[p.153]

133. C«;

EM go ges
— Of Sl— Nn

aon ht BL |
. ey
bo Ds} nb bh

let ae be ie
eriow Ow
Velo elo &
y w/V & 0c
Ole clea
Z|
ne
Fe

Lizsern SECVNDVS.
LITERAE SCRIPTI

vat te

:

[p.154]

134 De Occy crt. Ltr. Nort. Che
er atergg “gin hanc formam parata tabella, que amico
, cognita fit, verba extrinfecus , quz fcriptum
aperiant, ut in fuperioribus fa@umeft, utrin-
bCentio. que nota capiantur. » Hec quo magisab ho.
minum cognitione remota fuerint: tutiorem
{criptocautionem przsttabunt. Quaread hec
fugienda {unt proverbia, quzin orevulgi ver.
fantur: ne fi furtivi {cripti{pecies cognofcatur,
modus. inde pariter aliquo modo cognofci
ofsit.. Huius loci eft reterre {uperioribus die-
usin huncmodum miflam epiftolam 2 {ciolo
quodani quiRomz agebat, cum eius admira-
tione, eadem hora qua literas accepi, me fuiffe
interpretatum. Cuius rei caufa fortaffé effe
potuit , quod di@um index {cripti hoc erat.
Ownta Vinctr Amor, qua fententia
proverbij vice, nemini fré non cognita eft.
Tabelle itaq, huius , &indicis ufus fic fehabet; —
Epiftole verba in primachartainterpofitisli- |
terarum {pacijs per totum linezx verfum com- —
ponantur: sic deinde & alij verfus fiant,donec
omneid, quod fcribendumett, perficiatur. Re-
liis tamen (utin proximo capiteadmonitum »
eft) juftis inter verfus {pacijs, quibus di@um
ad eandem rationem inferi polite In hune
modum arcaefimul & clave parata, ea taliratio- -
ne occludetur. ¢ Primum clavis prima litera
in {uo queratur alphabeto, ea inventa inde
{cripti litera in illius seQione requiratur, pro
€atum, si fuperius posita fit, inferior, que mus
tuo oceurrit ex adverfo, si fuperiis inferior
asfumatur, ea sic charte commisfia, in alijs o
modo

---

Translation:

They will not be ten feGiones.
They will be able to make feprem feprem fieri, and one letter and twenty fint, so that three single letters.
cipiant, five bine, five tern of this alphabet's fint,
the same in one line

——— ———ael ee

_>

[p.155]

LregR SECVYNDVS. 134

Now it is to be done, until the entire epistle is made clear by means of artifice; the example will become clearer. The words of the epistle are these: BELLA FORTISSIME GESTA SVNT, ET BeELuis PARTIM COMPOSITIS, PARTIM | ET1IAM CONFECTIS Pax EST SEQvVv- TAs SED HANC FELICITATEM DVCIS MORS TVRBAVIT. : Post hoc diem index statuatur. CasTvM FODERAT LvcRETIA PectTvs ALGAZEL. I}lud in hunc moda fub {cripti verbis difponat. BELLA FORTISSIME GESTA SVNT ET castumfoderatLu creti apectu BELLIS PARTIM COMPOSITIS PARTIM salgazelcast umfoderatLucretit ETIAM CONFECTIS PAX EST SEQV- apect usalgazel cas tumfoder TA SED HANC FELICITATEM DVCIS at Luc reti apectusalga zelca MORS TVRBAVIT.

$ tumfoderatL.

But truly the key is distinguished by an eximious tabula (table), which will be indicated by the first letter found in its proper order, the first cipher letter, which is B, and for it a sufficient N is indicated, then here for B obscurely placed: thus in this way the entire hidden cryptogram will be extracted from the open; and this Crit. Nroop ndmbthfntt {xhdu fcch ve rrfixe eusgnp rgxithogul azaint rbtzp rlaoopftl dusf vda hyek gq ltp byiy fynufz dumoz rlynf plom icfzrbum.

| 14 Ma.

[p.156]

. tis rationis.

— 4936 De Occvrt1 Lit. Nor

>

ee ‘ k Modus hic quam multiplicem scribebendi va-

“ rietatem fuggerat.leGor poterit intueri ; ut nunquam feré pro eadem litera eundem characterem pofitum agnofcat, amicus in inter- retando eundem modum (utin multis di- '£ Collatio hu- Gum eft) fervabit. / Scribendi hzc ratio cum ins rationis ‘

yoene prece- PFOxima hoc commune habet " quod dio ne aliunde aslumpro, utraque occluditur. In hoc vero differt, quod illa proprias {cripti lireras, hzc vero non literarum pofitione, sed subftituentiam obfcuratur. 3 |

Carpvt AVIL «Tv.Parsfeus: — @ Modus, quodittiouna alteram - fignificat.

‘Tranfition 4» Sones novisfimum {cribendi genus,quo {criptum preter difficultatem, quafefatis tueri polsit fufpicione etiam carebit , quod

Translation:

——— ———ael ee

_>

[p.155]

LregR SECVYNDVS. 134

Now it is to be done, until the entire epistle is made clear by means of artifice; the example will become clearer. The words of the epistle are these: BELLA FORTISSIME GESTA SVNT, ET BeELuis PARTIM COMPOS

In the fourth place, smoke indicates the thumb. Having dissolved this, it will be revealed, which is far less than that of this book's exposition for the powers of fate and life.

Of this part, since among other things, with great caution one must use the method = ximé (perhaps "caution" or a cipher term); not improperly calculated. It is twice applied to this place so that in the correct order it may be seen. Therefore, in difficult matters, especially concerning his affairs, he will particularly defend this place, where (the crypt) with care and circumspection will be defended.

This kind of cryptogram, as many other things are, from which we shall derive some, which will be discovered, is the first to occur,

First ratio, .

[p.157]

The SECOND BOOK 137

which varies in fable, enclosed by words; sometimes friends' words are confined, safely they speak to each other, which will be intercepted, as many things will be, not all applying poison, but one so great and infinite that it will square (i.e., fit or match) and the more subtly it is investigated, the longer it will last. For from Apollo, Daphne, the pharos (or fire-altar), corollas, and flowers enunciated, (they are) given to cities, swords, or weapons, and to soldiers and clothing in the earth: so it will be that a cryptic epistle, if anyone finds it, with words understood, many things will be done, which no writer had thought. Therefore before proceeding further, we shall teach an example; therefore I will call Apollo the King, Scorpius the Scorpion, the host's tail, flies with promilitary (or martial) [terms?], and for decency and to avoid offense, I will place it.

Thus if cryptograms are made:

Translation:

In the fourth place, smoke indicates the thumb. Having dissolved this, it will be revealed, which is far less than that of this book's exposition for the powers of fate and life.

Of this part, since among other things, with great caution one must use the method = ximé (perhaps "caution" or a cipher term); not improperly calculated. It is twice applied to this place so that in the correct order it may be seen. Therefore, in difficult matters, especially concerning his affairs, he will particularly defend this place, where (the crypt) with care and circumspection will be defended.

This kind of cryptogram, as many other things are, from which we shall derive some, which will be discovered, is the first to occur,

First ratio, .

[p.157]

The SECOND BOOK 137

which varies in fable, enclosed by words; sometimes friends' words are confined, safely they speak to each other, which will be intercepted, as many things will be, not all applying poison, but one so great and infinite that it will square (i.e., fit or match) and the more subtly it is investigated, the longer it will last. For from Apollo, Daphne, the pharos (or fire-altar), corollas, and flowers enunciated, (they are) given to cities, swords, or weapons, and to soldiers and clothing in the earth: so it will be that a cryptic epistle, if anyone finds it, with words understood, many things will be done, which no writer had thought. Therefore before proceeding further, we shall teach an example; therefore I will call Apollo the King, Scorpius the Scorpion, the host's tail, flies with promilitary (or martial) [terms?], and for decency and to avoid offense, I will place it.

Thus if cryptograms are made:

I know the king is accustomed on his journey to {bring together a word from which Gallia is far away, true hostages of infidelity, lest they be sold. Nor let it be said that these things will happen to the enemies. For indeed the sceptre, namely by force, will easily be able to depopulate the city, all in {its} ruin and extermination with a great number. Ninety thousand soldiers guard the gate with skill. They will not be killed: on the contrary, the first captured city will easily be handed over to the army. For indeed, having been made favorable by wind, with great force they will drive away the port; captives will be taken, women, men: and chastity will be completely disturbed, so that it can never be restored. But my own name in a tablet is written.

Let us convert this into such a cover.

I know Apollonius to be bound by the order of signs, far from the Scorpion, whose power is hidden. For indeed another {thing} [is] laureate.

[p.158]

"Women may

- from this Poetamo

lips* are poured out.

138 De OccvLr. Lrr. Nor. <.
laureate tempora (7 mountains may be climbed). They will be held

tactfully nine Muses, who hang from hooks: easily they become of the source; Udembontem [they] will completely walk around. For indeed rapacious birds' fertile flock: so that flowers and herbs are destroyed: thus the spring is exhausted, so that no other than the poet's lips flow out. But you for me

tablet of the calculator. b That which is forced not by families © of heaven, & necessary things, namely Apollonius, springs, muses, or imitations.

intending to make all about the matter public,

it will be possible to translate the same matters to familiars, so that less pain, or taste may return. The most gentle example.

I know Marcella sweetest Fabricia of Naples, far away from the winds, long-lived; singers Cv are afraid: when good (ua here hears the sound of maidens loving, soon at _ forores [they] will be coningent). Many indeed will happen,

93. ratio.

k The fame

of this kind of reasoning.

with easy plunder heard: so that house, wife, ¢ [things] are scattered, so that they never greatly increase. I also in the name of a beloved tablet. How much then is it

Translation:

I know the king is accustomed on his journey to {bring together a word from which Gallia is far away, true hostages of infidelity, lest they be sold. Nor let it be said that these things will happen to the enemies. For indeed the sceptre, namely by force, will easily be able to depopulate the city, all in {its} ruin and extermination with a great number. Ninety thousand soldiers guard the gate with skill. They will not be killed: on the contrary, the first captured city will easily be handed over to the army. For indeed, having been made favorable by wind, with great force they will drive away the port; captives will be taken, women, men: and chastity will be completely disturbed, so that it can never be restored. But my own name in a tablet is written.

Let us convert this into such a cover.

I know Apollonius to be bound by the order of signs, far from the Scorpion, whose power is hidden. For indeed another {thing} [is] laureate.

[p.158]

"Women may

- from this Poetamo

lips* are poured out.

138 De OccvLr. Lrr

"Whoever, who if the Castalian spring of the fountain, the forum, and the conjugations hears,
will think that the cities of the priests, and the explanations of secrets will be revealed?
For he will open the hidden chambers of human hearts, and perceive them as if they were made for him,
which are placed there with secure locks, with words not expressed? {I indeed consider those who intercept
the letters between, to see, to decipher, while reading such things, there the secrets will be revealed. I could
if anyone wishes to describe the elements of the letters or to define them, while only giving an example.
KHoc (in the manner of writing almost all these) {cribendi modo omnes fere hu-
Ne —i = ae a

[p.159]

Lrsper StEvYNDVS. 49
ius ztatis homines vtuntur. / Amantes etiam /4 Ratio.
fepé pluribus prefentibus aut hiftoriam, aut eotumamorem narrant, acalienis nominibus
de fe & amica loquuntur, fie cori amoresde-
prehendantur. Parisapud Ovidium inepiftola
ad Helenam hoc teftatum reliquit.
Ah quoties aliquemnarravi potus amorem,
Ad vultusreferens fingula verba tuos.
Indiciumque met ficto {ub nomine fect,

Ile ego, fine[cu, verus amator cram.
Etalib1.
Nee aliquis verbis ollio{as afferat aures,
Quam potes ambiguis callidus abde notis,

m¥Etiam aliovti poterimus occultandi modo *:. Batio.
ha&enus cdtatisieho , culus regula talis eft.
Eiufdem typi duo parentur libri; cujus*alte- Sis Me
rum amicus apud fe, alrerum nos domi conti-
Cardanos neamus, in hoc charta aliqua ex vniverfo erit {>-'* éevar
eligenda,in qua{cribere volum?, eiusq;nume-
“ri prius con{cium amicum reddamus,vel diera
menfis, & anni, vel alterius reinumero quaha-
bita, vbinoftram fenrentiam breviter per(trin-
xerimus, in ftatutis illius paginz locis, ea vel
similia verba reperiemus: & tandiu paginas
vellineas permurabimus,donectotum (cripto
talicommutemus : quod vbi fecerimus,denuo a fummo capiterem aggrediemur, & verbum
cadem linea precedens velfubfequens, velnu-
mero dis tansaliquo accipiamus,ac denuo {cribemus, aliaconfurget epiftola, fed diverfx fen-
tentiz. Atcum fine ordine, & finevera aliqua fignificazione veniet, sic eam seceminatiae

i : MUS,

i 3 i ee

[p.160]"

I need to reconstruct garbled words carefully.

First paragraph: "quifque, qui fi Caftalij fontis, mufarum, foro- rorum, & conjugum mentionem fa&am audiet," -> likely "Quicumque, qui si Castalii fontis, musarum, forum, et coniugum mentem facit audiat" but OCR errors. Let's parse:

"quifque" = "Quicumque"
"fi Caftalij font

Example.

Jari, generosity is foolish in dangerous situations. August 140 De Occur. Lir. Nor.
we say. Many we will infer words so that the order of another is found, and it is not superfluous to be noted by a friend, a line, or some sign in the foot, or between two parentheses, accent, but a dot in the first letter, or some sign: the rest which we can change, time, number, person, and genus by turning and adapting, so that speech fits more closely. Books, with which we can use, all kinds of words {contain,
use Cicero, Pliny, Rodigino, Ovid and many others. »But examples will be clearer.

Africa will be softened by the gentleness of children's hearing, a worthy punishment for generosity, angry ire will strike.

~~ 5,X¥1 hour goes

a6. Ratio.
* cuiquam,

is strong: he is able, not seeing, admits, confesses lamina &r,
lethal perf. lam
? but, diligent ones.

If we read Pliny in the book with title xvi,
Basilica from the Frobenian press, we will find it with frequent words turned over,
the Vrbseadein supplicants do not (anger) many flee,
(¢) he addresses each one's true heart and protects
(/¢) coat can be taken.

Capvr XVIIL

Mode in which one speech is hidden by another bra&es
5 perforated, we will teach the method of striking
caustic, who neither * cui que erit
mquemquam occultz
fraudis confcium reddet’s qui fenefstrata ‘crit
inas & interpofitis liceris, & fyllabis &di-
| Gionibus

[p.161]

=

Liper SECVYNDYVYS. 141

&ionibs ociofis{cripti partes hincinde disper-

gentur. ¢Ratiotaliserit, Duzex ferro, velex « Bra@earum |

ftanno,-vel plumbo, vel membrana brace confettie,

comparentur, quarum magnitudine pro {cripti

quantitate effe poterit. Quare expedict cam

ad late charte magnitudinem zquari, ne

fi prolixius {Criptum futurum fit, eadem Ia-

mina fzpius applicetur,eademque femper {pa-

cij menfura inter oportunas literas interfit.

Liper SECYNDYVYS. 141

Translation:

Example.

Jari, generosity is foolish in dangerous situations. August 140 De Occur. Lir. Nor.
we say. Many we will infer words so that the order of another is found, and it is not superfluous to be noted by a friend, a line, or some sign in the foot, or between two parentheses, accent, but a dot in the first letter, or some sign: the rest which we can change, time, number, person, and genus by turning and adapting, so that speech fits more closely. Books, with which we can use, all kinds of words {contain,
use Cicero, Pliny, Rodigino, Ovid and many others. »But examples will be clearer.

Africa will be softened by the gentleness of children's hearing, a worthy punishment for generosity, angry ire will strike.

~~ 5,X¥1 hour goes

a6. Ratio.
* cuiquam,

is strong: he is able, not seeing, admits, confesses lamina &r,
lethal perf. lam
? but, diligent ones.

If

The second vellum is glued to the other, and firmly adhered, so that no error occurs; it will be designed with two parallel lines, spaced according to the size of the body, between which the letters are interwoven.

This is done at will, so that as much empty space as possible remains within it — as much as the cryptic parts allow us. Yet this varies depending on the occasion (as the meaning requires), sometimes being narrow, sometimes wide enough to contain many letters; thus it is made, and thus is entirely vacated from within.

It is formed in this manner by typographers: they use black (or alternatively red) ink for the letters, so that the entire work does not appear of a single color.

Each prepared sheet will retain the other — one nearly warms the friend. [The] writing therefore, to whatever extent it may be contracted or expanded (for brevity in secret writing is maximally convenient), will be very useful and firm; on paper, such sheets are placed, covered and firmly secured with transparent and empty layers, while this entire thing — which must be written — gains the opportunities for secrecy.

Written.

Translation:

The second vellum is glued to the other, and firmly adhered, so that no error occurs; it will be designed with two parallel lines, spaced according to the size of the body, between which the letters are interwoven.

This is done at will, so that as much empty space as possible remains within it — as much as the cryptic parts allow us. Yet this varies depending on the occasion (as the meaning requires), sometimes being narrow, sometimes wide enough to contain many letters; thus it is made, and thus is entirely vacated from within.

It is formed in this manner by typographers: they use black (or alternatively red) ink for the letters, so that the entire work does not appear of a single color.

Each prepared sheet will retain the other — one nearly warms the friend. [The] writing therefore, to whatever extent it may be contracted or expanded (for brevity in secret writing is maximally convenient), will be very useful and firm; on paper, such sheets are placed, covered and firmly secured with transparent and empty layers, while this entire thing — which must be written — gains the opportunities for secrecy.

Written.

It will be written on the same lamina so that they may be dispersed from there.

The letters of Tumera, which were white or marked with a cross, to which lines of smoke and air correspond: the smoke is drawn forth; this is done by passing the chart through the letters, syllables, and digits, which are thus filled in, so that the words become more hidden, and they appear more distant, and thus have less suspicion: for this reason it will be written and arranged, until the whole is perfected, so that the form of speech appears suitable and continuous.

That is, to interpret the cipher text, four pounds, which are marked at the ends with firm signs, must be indicated. But by example, things are better explained, if we apply the words of our own ciphers.

[p.163]

Read Sacvnpdvs. 143

Lis

Comiffo upon it written, for the parts of the body are separated between intervals.

Mili th , m infin
s tus est exerc itus |
ac prope diem . ini
~ bunt be lum, ex plo rate
eres. omnes -depreben - fi fu . mt,
capite pen as de dere.

Verim impletis ociofara literarum {pacijs, in vtruna; sic prodibitoratio: duplicis orationisex induftriaexemplum appofuim?,vtcomodinsliqueret,quidlibet, ad omnia ver- bafervatoetiam literarum nexu pofle accommodari.
Grate .Mili fie tax fuere litere, prefertim cum infin
{criptus e# ludus, quo fe exerc et Titw nofter fami-
liaris, .4¢ prope modum in, diem inimicus, propterea ama buns bené idum, si is exemplo eorum, ratogue modo.res: omnes deprebendet, at fi fumunt alij rem
4 fummo capite, cum penitebit ill amplius deridere.
vale. {dem aliter etiam fic,

Honor Militiz taus fuit Carolus pater, nam cum infini-
to. Victus eff, cum minima exercitu invita parte hoftis fugit, ac prope vitimum diem iniurius peribit, ne-
cabunt - Bere illam; atque extemplo puer Arato pe-
ribit, ves omnes deprebenfe bonz fi fant, ante Sillam,
& optimo capite non penitentias amplius decidere
{perabit. Vale. ‘Amicus

[p.164]

[The] Honor Militiz was Charles the father, for with infinite... Having been defeated, with a small army he fled from the hostile part of the hosts, and almost on the day of victory he perished unjustly, lest they take her; and at once the boy Arato perished, all being deceived by good faith, before Sillam, and not having decided any longer with a good head. He will be able. Friend

[The] G

vale. {dem aliter etiam fic,

[p.164]

a ’

Translation:

It will be written on the same lamina so that they may be dispersed from there.

The letters of Tumera, which were white or marked with a cross, to which lines of smoke and air correspond: the smoke is drawn forth; this is done by passing the chart through the letters, syllables, and digits, which are thus filled in, so that the words become more hidden, and they appear more distant, and thus have less suspicion: for this reason it will be written and arranged, until the whole is perfected, so that the

m4 Des Occvur. Lit. Nor
sLegendibae ¢ Amicus vero interpres fuperpofita bracea
ierconfervaae per feneftras occultatam fententiam con{pi.
dig; ratios ciet. Cuius exemplum, vt in pofterum ferve.
i * tur, eaamotaaliotran{cribet. Potérit & hoc —
t liter fieri in conftituta cuiufvis libri pagina »
magis oportuna, ex tantum litere, pees ;
diGiones,que prime occurrunt, &adid expli- |
candum quod voluerimus neceflaria fint eli-
gantur: quousque tota epiftola feritentiaeli-.
ciatur; oleo deinde vel cera pellucida chatta
 comparetur, ea libri folio fuperpofita, omnia
| feleGtarum partium emicantia {pacia lineolis
“ Atq;itahge atramento du@is defignentut, *hec*tamen
tz,Ratio. § chartamittipotetit. / Quod fi eamioleo vel ce.
yc ra pollutam mittinon libeat; eius loco aliaca-
- “Anharens, piatut) que fub eam firmiter inhzrente* ali-
quo ftylo adindicandas literas comptimatur, |
&earii deinde figna atramento protrahantur;
Eam deindeinterpres, vt dixitnus, vel oleo vel
*Superpofita. cera pellucidam faciet, que * fuppofita & fir-
matafubjeGas partes indicabit: Sic quod fi-
mb Ratie — onificatum eft agnofcetur. mHoc etiam ante
= circino,vacua primum, deinde plena{paciadi-
2 metiente efficietur, vel aliter vt commodius
fieri poterit. ), OF
| Carpvr XIX.
adbditifimus per [ynonyma, vel paria
j verba (cribends modus.
Nter ceteras {cribendi technas, quz in vsu
wins eflefolent, nequequam contemnendzfub-
rithem :

Polygraph. tilitatis cuiufda Abbatis 4 Trithemij aftuseft,
in quo

[p.165]

f

Liweer SECVNDVS. ps

quoabfoluendo *ingens ferétotum volumen * concianido.
fimul abfoluit: ¢cuius tationem, he quid infti- Sur autor
tuto oper! defit, ame prius coghitam » QUAM traéer. ai

alibi traGatam {citem, nolui pretermittere 2d dCaufa. 1.

---  

Translation:

m4 From Occur. Lit. Nor
sLegendibae ¢ A true friend is also an interpreter of the hidden brace (or "brace" possibly a cipher term; context suggests "key" or "device")
ierconfervaae per feneftras occultatam fententiam con{pi.
dig; ratios ciet. Cuius exemplum, vt in pofterum ferve.
i * tur, eaamotaaliotran{cribet. Potérit & hoc —
t liter fieri in conftituta cuiufvis libri pagina »
magis oportuna, ex tantum litere, pees ;
diGiones,que prime occurrunt,

Because the matter was negligibly insignificant to life,
which would be useful for avoiding suspicion: namely, "Causa," 2,
and also because it would more conveniently serve us — than that smoke, which had been produced. For what reason, in whatever manner, has the form of religious prayer "reappeared": it is more suitable in this epistolary mode, so as to be less suspected of anything else; we have arranged it thus. As for linear [elements], 4 44: < punGorum, and other signs, which are made to serve as letters, we have added the alphabet, so that the meaning may be possible; lest it always seem to be a mere proverb. Truly, in this we have much benefit from brevity, since few words suffice; the kind of [cipher] modes which have been devised for writing, let us therefore add them. Therefore, regarding the Table of Epistles on this subject, whose words are concisely arranged in a definite number, to which judgment is often added of this kind of thing, by means of pounds and such signs, which in epistolary form are made; see how much more the total number of epistles will appear. We have thus added to us more than fifty divisions, which we thought could exist as that number, with pounds and other signs of the fexagenarium [i.e., base-60], fearing that the word itself, or words alone, or pairs and double pairs of words, whose number of letters appears in the alphabet, would constitute. Not 9 K for

[p.166]

:

— | , ‘m6 4 6©\De Occvit. Lir. Nor. -

for, as with other divisions, much is done in secret;

we work around orthography; yet we sometimes allow ourselves the liberty to err, only by avoiding greater matters: let us avoid distinction and suspicion: which also with merit we expose in synonyms, for its property and reason of the fervent fire would be, that these things were owed to us regarding matters of actors: it would not easily be the same person;

it is also because we rather wish how

Translation:

Because the matter was negligibly insignificant to life,
which would be useful for avoiding suspicion: namely, "Causa," 2,
and also because it would more conveniently serve us — than that smoke, which had been produced. For what reason, in whatever manner, has the form of religious prayer "reappeared": it is more suitable in this epistolary mode, so as to be less suspected of anything else; we have arranged it thus. As for linear [elements], 4 44: < punGorum, and other signs, which are made to serve as letters, we have added the alphabet, so that the meaning may be possible; lest it always seem to be a mere proverb. Truly, in this we have much benefit from brevity, since few words suffice; the kind of [cipher] modes which have been devised for writing, let us therefore add them. Therefore, regarding the Table of Epistles on this subject, whose words are concisely arranged in a definite number, to which judgment is often added of this kind of thing, by means of pounds and such signs, which in epistolary form are made; see how much more the total number of epistles will appear. We have thus added to us more than fifty divisions, which we thought could exist as that number, with pounds and other signs of the fexagenarium [i.e., base-60], fearing that the word itself, or words alone, or pairs and double pairs of words, whose number of letters appears in the alphabet, would constitute. Not 9 K for

[p.166]

:

— |

"Whatever sign is meant, we will explain it by its own proper meaning. Therefore, we arrange the same words in pairs in order for the epistle, with appropriate brevity, disposed into tables, so that each word corresponds to a single letter of our alphabet, and thus all things may be dissolved in all signs, and the entire epistle is perfectly divided into parts. Here, first the sign of our religion, from which the beginning of writing arises, we note the principal letters, vowels, and other necessary kinds of signs placed in appropriate locations within the epistle cell, so that we vary the same forms of letters with the same notation, so that they may be hidden, while the power of letters is secretly changed. The tables therefore proceed by order, so that first our religious sign, soon the marks of the principal letters, are arranged in the epistle with similar words, and among these vowels, other such kinds are placed, their example being removed. Better. We will proceed from the head. Thus, with these things and ordered composition of tables in this manner."

Translation:

"Whatever sign is meant, we will explain it by its own proper meaning. Therefore, we arrange the same words in pairs in order for the epistle, with appropriate brevity, disposed into tables, so that each word corresponds to a single letter of our alphabet, and thus all things may be dissolved in all signs, and the entire epistle is perfectly divided into parts. Here, first the sign of our religion, from which the beginning of writing arises, we note the principal letters, vowels, and other necessary kinds of signs placed in appropriate locations within the epistle cell, so that we vary the same forms of letters with the same notation, so that they may be hidden, while the power of letters is secretly changed. The tables therefore proceed by order, so that first our religious sign, soon the marks of the principal letters, are arranged in the epistle with similar words, and among these vowels, other such kinds are placed, their example being removed. Better. We will proceed from the head. Thus, with these things and ordered composition of tables in this manner."

"First, the epistle is arranged so that the first cipher letter varies in position according to the cross sign, which will be determined by its figure; for this reason, the first cipher letter of the cross sign is placed at the beginning of the front face of the same column, soon after in the place following it with the same power in the subsequent table found, when the initial index is changed, the third letter is placed in the third order of the tables; no letter and the fourth requires the fourth [cipher], which is placed in this way until the entire epistle is written. It must be seen truly that * cipher letters are required in the same column, lest any table be omitted, so that it may be easier to avoid confusion by first writing the cipher letters on the letters themselves, soon after placing the notes of the numbers on the tables. If the tables of numbers are not present, it will be necessary to repeat [them], and another epistle must be placed on another sheet, lest the same chart contain words in equal letters. Let the matter be made clearer by example 4& a half.

It is seen that the proposed words here are,

HOC TITUS IN ITINERE OBVIAM FACTVS
Est, CYMQ. Div PYGNATVM ESSET,
TERGA DEDIT."

Epistle, which will conceal the words, this will be,

ctr
ng Atop: your letters most clearly [are] of Pompei Severi* — meisibus Feb. per Tiburtium sabelarinm tuum, llico per-

eps

[p.168]

448 De Occyr. Lit. Nor
cepi voluntatem tuam equidem gratulabundus, prudenter parui,prabuiea ratione tuo nomine Lalio credstort tuo mil-
le ¢o quing, aurcos ex emptione, Si quidpiam vacat expofct-
to, 27 obtemperabo permotus (uavt incundaque benevolen-
tia amicorum tuorum, iube fim certior de tuis rebus

yt fism congratuler,vel dolorem fentiam,
Vale. Datum Neapoli. 5. Fe-
bruar. t5 60.

© Tausfidelis Baptifia Porta neapolitanus."

Then the garbled section:

"a
: 28 — Dae Occves Lrr. Nor:
USGS ACIS
I EIR AI ety 4

a duicis ° aet

b honorate b atqueetiam

c amate c perindeac

d fuavis d& -

e lepide e idemque

f humane f acetiam"

We need to translate, preserving technical terms. The garbled part seems like OCR errors; we need to reconstruct likely Latin words.

Let's parse:

"a duicis ° aet" maybe "a ducis° aet"? Could be "a ducis aet"? Not sure.

"b honorate b atqueetiam" maybe "b honorate, atque etiam". So "b honorate, and also".

"c amate c perindeac" maybe "c amate, perinde ac". Possibly "c amate, perinde ac". Hard.

"d fuavis d& -" maybe "d fuit, &"? Or "d fuit, &"? Not sure.

"e lepide e idemque" maybe "e lepidè, e idemque". So "e lepidè, et idemque".

"f humane f acetiam" maybe "f humanâ, f aceti am"? Hmm.

The context seems like a list of instructions or notes. Might be from a cipher key: letters with

robe ac .  
ipeate atque  

[p.171]

Lrpen S8cvNnpves.

y sit 8.  
a Illuftrifsime a Fabrici  
b familiarifsime b Vincenti  
c charifsime c Baptifta  
d amplifsime d Federice  
e felicifsime e Iacobe  
f {plendidifsime £ Petre  

Alfonse  
Francifce  

excellentifsime  
celebetrime  

h  

i clarifsime -—-i_- Antoni  

] munificentifsime! Czfar  
m acutifsime m Hierony mi.  

n gravifsime n Pompete  
© integerrime o Domine  
p benignifsime — p Scipio  
q clementifsime gq Nicolai  
er modeftifsime r Garole  
s eruditifSsime s Nute  

t folertifsime tt Alberte  

u morigeratifZime u Ioannes  
x preftantifsime x Alexander  

ifsime vy Auguitine  
: cae + | ee  

[p.172]

—_—  

4  

Iso : De Occvtr. Lir. Nort:

.& AGB TNE LY moe Alt DR |
| See rae Bx £3 “sh UpA SG We |
10 1 12 ,  
| _a pridiecalendas a Ianuarij a sempibnigin  
- b calendis b Februarij b Tiberium  
 ¢ oavoidus c Marty’ ~ cc Tullium  
_d fextoidus d Aprilis d Lucium  
 e quintoidus e¢ Maij e Lycifcam  
- £ quartoidus f Tunij f Palemonem  
_-g tertioidus: — . Tulij g¢ Simeonem  
b pridie nonas Augutti h Ludovicum  
uartocalendas i Feb. i Trebatium  

1 extocalendas | O@obris 1 Petreum  
_ m feptimocalendas m Novembris & m Tyronem  
n nonocalendas n Decembris & n Tiburtium:

- @ oGavocalendas o Quintilis o Theseum —  
\ p decimocalendas p Sextilis ' p Artemidorum  
-q.vndecimo¢al. q Septembris q Haly  
x duodecimocal. r Iul.- r Petronium  
 s-decimos.cal.. $s Ianu. s Quirinum  
t idibus.\~ t Aug. t Sextum  
u tertiononas u Mart, u Iosеphum  
x quartononas x Apri x Valerium  
y decimo3. calend. y Mai. y Franconium  
z quintocalendas z lun, z Pontanum  

atabel-

[p.173]

BOR  

LrspeRr SECVNDVS.

é Nees yoy!

Bu  

153  
Wats  

Ct  

13  
a tabellionem  

b libertinum  

c fervum  

d fecretum  

e tabellarium  

f clientem  

g hofpitem  

h libertum  

i manumisflum  

] amicum ‘  

m yernam  

n contubernalem  

oafsiduum gs  
->  

p delatorem

"99 Mainoutned  
it Pap  
a {ubito  
b cito  
c extemplo  
d ftatim  
e illico  
f continuo  
g confeftim  
h mox  
i éveltigio  
1 ocy{fsimeé  
m mature  
n przpoperé  
o rapum  
p citius  
q citisfimé  

r velociter  
s feftine  
t repenté  
u celeriter  
x praito »

y inopinate  

Zz ex improvifio.  
K §  

a vidi  

ra,  

a eee es ae  

[p.174] ——————— Ff LIBER Se gamers ~ 1§4  

e300 VRP AGIA xo. Ova |  
IIS AROS: cA ee 3 4 ‘7  
16 17  
avid? . a rogatum a certé  
b infext b voluntatem __ b indubitanter  
¢ intellext c conceptum c nempe  
| dagnovi ddefiderium $$ dnimirum  
- econfpexi — ¢ mentem ¢ medius fidius  
£ perfpexi f intentionem f edepol  
g accepi diGum (tionem g fané  
~hhauh precep = h porro  
i excepi irogatum < 5 i plane  
l providi loptatum © 1 profedo _  
m animadverti mcogitationem m enimvero |  
n novi naffefionem on en  
© percepi opropofitum _o dubio procul  
Pp penetravi p intentum Pp quippe  
q perpendi qpoftulaum —§ q verum  
_ § concepi r animum r indubitate  
. $ Inveni s deliberationem s pol  
t cognovi t juflum t mehercle  
uconfideravi u confilium uequidem  
_ x didici ) -&X petitionem x cxterum  
+-y expendi y przceptum y perpol  
zmandatum clare bah o/  

z habul  

a cupi-"

We need to translate Latin-like garbled text into clear modern English, preserving technical terms. The passage seems like a cipher or pseudo-Latin with many errors; we must reconstruct plausible words.

Let's parse line by line:

"99 Mainoutned" maybe "99 Main outned"? Could be "99 main outnede"? Not sure. Maybe it's "99 main outnede" meaning "99 main outne"? Might be a heading: "99 Main outned". Could be "99 main outnede" -> "99 main outnede" maybe "99 main outnede" is nonsense.

Next line: "yt Pap" maybe "it Pap" or "y t Pap". Could be "it Pap". Maybe "Pap" stands for "Papa"? Or "Pap" as abbreviation for "papyrus"? Not sure.

Then a series of letters with braces:

a {ubito
b cito
c extemplo
d ftatim
e illico
f continuo
g confeftim
h mox
i éveltigio
1 ocy{fsimeé
m mature
n przpoperé
o rapum
p citius
q citisfimé

These look like Latin words with some letters gar