It is concealed or connected. Singulary (or singulis) of the things, . . !

the verb itself. The same verb will signify many things, as MALYYS, a tree, fruit, and him who is impious can signify it. It could happen not d2. In the singular mode with an intact verb, but also in the dual, as Se rumate TING ENS, that from itself the word might efface, name,

& Connectorii & præpolitio. It happens and connects the word, equimodam ambiguity may arise, which can be born, cue -

of this kind Apollo's Oracle is delivered.

To bind Romans with Aiote Lacida.

«a CA AG,

Fifty verbs, from which a hundred arises; Achilles dies.

From whence, through case, through bend and collocation,

-alias species, which must be presented over empty

from Amphibol. in it ambiguity can even occur. For Foistefles & Amphibologra, in the obscurity of words as if hiddenly concealed, and speech of signs appears similar to sight: such things are verses, and poets.

* : bel bel ‘ *

“gtOreculaEihfcripta. Poflem huc fpectantia referre g Qra-

side Naina, culorum, & h Sibyllarum vaticinia complura,

Chron. Synop. quæ ancipites sensus maxime ob{curos retisibyl, nent, ut vixfensus clicipofsit queminmodum

Vatic. Eorum adita {unt Apollinisre{ponfa, quz ab Herodo- | Teoh xyteust recenfentur, quo fit, yt proverbiorecepti

Betulcius._ fit, yt. qui itaobfcure loquitur, Sibyllz folium ae sromerecenfeatur, AEnigmartibus etiam fimi- iz.$ymbola lia sunt 4 Pythagoreorum symbola, vetuftif-

ponon yulgari nequecommuni dicendi mos

; } : ns ruir,

[p.43]

Translation:

It is concealed or connected. Singulary (or singulis) of the things, . . !

the verb itself. The same verb will signify many things, as MALYYS, a tree, fruit, and him who is impious can signify it. It could happen not d2. In the singular mode with an intact verb, but also in the dual, as Se rumate TING ENS, that from itself the word might efface, name,

& Connectorii & præpolitio. It happens and connects the word, equimodam ambiguity may arise, which can be born, cue -

of this kind Apollo's Oracle is delivered.

To bind Romans with Aiote Lacida.

«a CA AG,

Fifty verbs, from which a hundred arises; Achilles dies.

From whence, through case, through bend and collocation,

-alias species, which must be presented over empty

from Amphibol. in it ambiguity can even occur. For Foistefles & Amphibologra, in the obscurity of words as if hiddenly concealed, and speech of signs appears similar to sight: such things are verses, and poets.

* : bel bel ‘ *

“gtOreculaEihfcripta. Poflem huc fpectantia referre g Qra-

side Naina, culorum, & h Sibyllarum vaticinia complura,

Chron. Synop. quæ ancipites sensus maxime ob{curos retisibyl, nent, ut vixfensus clicipofsit queminmodum

- Lirip is Parimvs. 23  
- it was, its own maxims among the fervent;  
no one sold them for a bank: liquid price of the secret was careful that no one could differ, ridiculous cunae & aniliadices**» .  
it would be renewed. Sermons about dangers & lamps  
blichus in @ius vita, and Plutarchus in the book de li- quos quafu- beris educandis&in convivalibus queftioni- yoke ty ach bus exponit, cuiufmodsfunt, quos recenf{ee De Curterio bimus. BBR) AMMAN yet 5 Hts Ee aa ee :  
1» Those who migrate have no reason to stay; we say: indeed they even interpret with them ‘Pemomne™ the : propemodum hominibus confuetudinem ineundam non deponete.  

efle, quosmorum depravatio denigrat. §) ¢  
», And fire must be kept burning, it is necessary not to extinguish it, for it is not proper to feed it, since better than that, while it is swelling, it should be allowed to subside. Thus  

/ y, Do not erase the vessel:  

Ollzveftiginm incinere videtur, cinere vfuseft - pro pulvere tabularum ubi mathematice de- _monitrationes conficiebantur: quasi innuat, ‘wmrelle&ualibus vti debere demoftrationibus, oblivifciverocorporeas & vifibiles. Rursus.  

‘, Neither leads, that which with nails is made sharp.  

Vbicofalit homines benignos & dapfiles efle: ‘non in retinendo tenaces;& reliqua qu¢ abillo symbola perfcriptafunt. Isq; character / apud (4. $aet. Grae,  

Grecos& AEgyptios occultandis divinis.& &. ~~ **" crisaptifsimus fuit.m Socrates étiam apud Pla- ee platonéadmonet,zeri facraramyfieriavelanda effe, vta deve. Papetanty plebeculaindignitate feparentur:P\ato alibigonfulit, 4!exand. indigniiprorsac ford effe,reraoccultarum 5 O%e - B4 mysteria  

ee ee ee ee ee .  

[p.44] pe. 9% Modus _& id 24 De Oceyrr. Ltr. Not.

--- End of text.

Translation:

- Lirip is Parimvs. 23  
- it was, its own maxims among the fervent;  
no one sold them for a bank: liquid price of the secret was careful that no one could differ, ridiculous cunae & aniliadices**» .  
it would be renewed. Sermons about dangers & lamps  
blichus in @ius vita, and Plutarchus in the book de li- quos quafu- beris educandis&in convivalibus queftioni- yoke ty ach bus exponit, cuiufmodsfunt, quos recenf{ee De Curterio bimus. BBR) AMMAN yet 5 Hts Ee aa ee :  
1» Those who migrate have no reason to stay; we say: indeed they even interpret with them ‘Pemomne™ the : propemodum hominibus confuetudin

"to open the mysteries to the people, since they are held by men of no reputation, who are accustomed to be led only by philosophers' fictions; therefore it is fitting that they be drawn away from them. For this reason, Macroiesapnd ar DiOrelatum was made; Eleusinas Deas through a furnace in the nobl[?] library, with the name of philosopher, appeared in lupanariproftirutas [likely 'lupinari' or similar], so that he might interpret their works. Augui@i, 2ufus was thus also said to be known by the common people: he had been warned by the gods where this fault originated, and having recognized it through careful investigation, being angry at the obstruction, he forbade all access from the old customs of modesty; and he himself was blamed for all their loss of benefit. This does not neglect the Hebrew laws or the practices of the Hebrews. Until now, to conceal this matter we have used various methods, though other arts also do this, and they propose to us that we act differently. It is fitting to permit the truth. Let nothing different be denied, which causes the obscurity of the matter; let us rather discuss other ways of speaking about it. For this reason, we admit foreign languages and dialects, which are known to us, so that we may explore them thoroughly, so that a more general use among Latin barbarians may be made of this, and also by Italians in this manner, or by the German, or by the French. [Hujus modi C]xfar ad Ciceronem epistolam {cripfit, non Ro- mana lingua , sed Greca, neea, que {cribe- ret, Gallis fortaffe:intercepta proderentur, quibus grecus fermo minimé erat cognitus. #2. Exemplum Identidemut fupradiGum eft ¢ Suniator fece- 4 a ung [p.45] De OccvitT Lit. Nor. 25"

Note: There are many OCR errors and unclear parts; I've made best scholarly reconstructions.

to open the mysteries to the people, since they are held by men of no reputation, who are accustomed to be led only by philosophers' fictions; therefore it is fitting that they be drawn away from them. For this reason, Macroiesapnd ar DiOrelatum was made; Eleusinas Deas through a furnace in the nobl[?] library, with the name of philosopher, appeared in lupinariproftirutas [likely 'lupinari' or similar], so that he might interpret their works. Augui@i, 2ufus was thus also said to be known by the common people: he had been warned by the gods where this fault originated, and having recognized it through careful investigation, being angry at the obstruction, he forbade all access from the old customs of modesty; and he himself was blamed for all their loss of benefit. This does not neglect the Hebrew laws or the practices of the Hebrews. Until now, to conceal this matter we have used various methods, though other arts also do this, and they propose to us that we act differently. It is fitting to permit the truth. Let nothing different be denied, which causes the obscurity of the matter; let us rather discuss other ways of speaking about it. For this reason, we admit foreign languages and dialects, which are known to us, so that we may explore them thoroughly, so that a more general use among Latin barbarians may be made of this, and also by Italians in this manner, or by the German, or by the French. [Hujus modi C]xfar ad Ciceronem epistolam {cripfit, non Ro

rat, who also stands firm at Dionysium {saying, lest a great conspiracy about the betrayal of Carthaginians be formed, he composed an epistle,
From these {the ratio of this writing, whose meaning is to have one of the not necessarily usual oaks transferred to him, or perhaps some {cryptic [or] ...], I found nothing with friends {epigram: roganribus detexi, *?5u = we will set an example, so that if sometimes someone falls into it,
they will not be ignorant of the harmful confusion. We do not change our words 7m >in the same way as in the father's firmness, whether doubled or ambiguous in Latin, which I also say: "I transform, and even when transformed, the signification remains; some people, regarding this matter, are less suitable for interpreting examples of translation, and indecent, not giving a theme of the father, but proposing.

| He was more solitary in some roof,

He transferred to him the bad thing of some , f2tigium.

x Also otherwise letters & pictures of the thing >3 Modus.
we express, and whenever a Latin example is not received, we use the common one; if someone says,
ALWAYS ALIVE: we always paint vivum,
namely more food, which commonly is called Always;
Viva is said; if however Core & Sor, we paint heart, music{que rhombis, vel notulis apposita clave, fol confingemus,

| in this way and perhaps

ce alias ae

1 4 A 0e€ +. eat, drink, Clare, ve, de.
Mec’ ‘choc elt ,
_Amice, wash, eat, drink, be silent , be quiet , go.
| a Bs & reli-

[p.46]

y 4 Modus:
Lingua ut
Genmnani vo-

26.0.—li(«Gs: We Ocever. Lit. Nov.

& reliqua huiusmodi, que quoniam apud vulgares circumferuntur, omittimus. y Vsurpa-
tur hactempeftate locutio circulatoribus, ta-

eanterythto- bernarijs, latronibus, & qui rudes homines
celtica.

<
*

x t. Modus:
Ope literarum

dolis circumveniunt, valde fagpiliaris , qui
quamplurimis vocabulis utuntur,a communt
-floquendi ufualienis, neintelliganrur, que fibi
magis propriaefle exsistentem inhuncmodum
multos, & pueros & fervos loqui videmnus;

dum fraudes alicui neGere conantur, utr doli |

fufpicionem vix inferant. z Sunt & qui fylla«

We need to reconstruct garbled words.

First line: "rat, qui & ereco fermone ad Dionyfium {cri- bens, ne confilium faum de proditione Car- thaginenfibus pateret, epiftolam concinnavit," Likely "Ratus"?? "rat" maybe "Ratus"? Could be "Rat" as a name? Maybe "Ratus" is a misspelling of "Ratus" (Latin for "he said")? Or "rat" could be "ratis"? Hmm. The phrase "ad Dionyfium" likely refers to "Dionysius". "ereco fermone" maybe "ergo fermum" -> "therefore firm". "ne confilium faum de proditione Carthaginibus pateret" -> "

The syllabaries are permuted so that the last becomes first and 41. Method: from the opposite, so that it is diffused. HOST IS PRESENT

wet abscis,

Beware Tist, they say: ThreeHOSSTS ARE

Veca Bitt, or Hobostibus abadebe#, cababe be
ribibibi: or any alicor wherever it pleases, tran{ver-

b 2. and 3. Method tent. 6 Otherwise some while fingulis fyllabis
smevdecs «gt inanes & inutiles interfere, ati RAT, Sis,
wapxyeys. let them say otherwise, HORAT STIS-

Reietio.

If S, ADRAT Estrat Casts VERAT
7Tisis Bisis, and all these speak in this manner
formulae; which when they are to be varied infinitely, for example by changing the letters, we direct them. But concerning such a mode of signification, >
who by voice utter it, is already fatis di-
=) G@umyidetur. Now to the other signs tran{ea.
mus.

#

CAaPrVv?T

[p.47]

—.

=
~

2. (Lae VP nw 1M v's: 27
ane Ca PVT a op Fn
Semivocaliafigna, qua fint , > quomode

per ea animum tndicare, Cr percipere pofimus.

‘Pp Roximum eft ut de semivocalibus signis 4 it, Genus

verba faciamus, que non parum ad rem S's“omves
noftra afferantadiumenti. Sic enim occultias,
fectetiusque rei con{cijs proxime, vel longe
diftantibs animi concepta fignificabimus, bSe- ¢ Quenam five
mivocalia itaque figna Vegetius: nominat ca, feas. *
qua aliter, quam voce emuitti folent: nempé

uorum corporum fe complodentium ida,
vel flatus {piritu ad -infstrumentum immiffo.
Cuius generis (unt c fonus campanz,lyre,buc- « Exempla.
cinz,, vel tormenti bellici, & reliqua id genus
omnium figna,quz aurib? percipiuntur.d Pof-
@ Ratio feu fumus.autem ciufmodi fignis, non res ipfas “wie.
modo, verum etiam verba per literas; quibus
ila conftruuntur fignificare, utpote fi pulsa-
tuumnertis {uz litere eo ordine, quo funt
difpofite reddantur , hoc vero effici poterit..”

quovis instrumento, quoresaptiuspolsit in- *

dicari. ¢ Legitur patrum noftrorum memoria, « 1. Exempla
obfefiam Novariam ci indies magis ac magis %
rerum omnium inopia laboraret tormentora
{clopiscerto ordine & numero aditis, omnib»

demum fignificationibus faGis fuprema rerat

---

Translation:

The syllabaries are permuted so that the last becomes first and 41. Method: from the opposite, so that it is diffused. HOST IS PRESENT

wet abscis,

Beware Tist, they say: ThreeHOSSTS ARE

Veca Bitt, or Hobostibus abadebe#, cababe be
ribibibi: or any alic

peril to friends and the proper opportunity

_ I beg for it, and with this indication from the hearths of citizens.

For friend is hidden in concealment, + Examples
and not much different, silently speaking between the wounds,
and hearing, and especially being heard,

[p.48]

g (near to the abodes.
contiguous,

b Reason t.
a 2.

one

la.
m if

n Example

e 3. Examples.

p Hypate & thus
henceforth: for it is
elliptical prayer.
the T [cili- ect
fixed
what about the matter of God-
willing
elsewhere many.
sound expression
through this kind
ignorance

|

5

2. De Occvir. Lit. Nor.

& if the house is contiguous: because from a small part of the wall of any side, the whole resounds,

it will then press against the wall, or even the fixed lock will be pressed even more, the number of wounds will receive it. The same also with the lock and key: though elongated, if the wounds are closed around it, in this way it touches the lyre, for it will easily be so that he who holds such a lock hears with his ears. For this reason, with walls / in the manner of strings, they are arranged in order, so that hanging friends respond to the wounds.

» Tripho Alexandrinus architectus Vitruvio referente hostibus in menia ingreßis ea ratione patrix peticulumcavit, siquidem cum eorum itrumpentium vim pet clamorem exaudiret, periclitanti urbi astuto consilio subvenit. 0 Potuit & quifque lyram aliudve id genus in manibus habens, nunc hypate , nunc pathypate, nunc nete, vel mefans pulsfans, nunc diapason, diapente, vel diactefaron abfolvens, donec alphabeti literas neceflarias abfolverit, aftantibus omnibus ami- cum derecertiorem facere. Deg rerum fignt- sificatione, que non per literas fuperfluum efle exsistimo quicquam dicere, cum omnibus fit exploratum dari certarum reram figna,
que per fonos intelligantur. Hoc de semivocalibus fignis dixif-
* fe fafficiat.

Slenaamieie, Carvt

[p.49]

---

Translation:

peril to friends and the proper opportunity

_ I beg for it, and with this indication from the hearths of citizens.

For friend is hidden in concealment, + Examples
and not much different, silently speaking between the wounds,
and hearing, and especially being heard,

[p.48]

g (near to the abodes.
contiguous,

b Reason t.
a 2.

one

la.
m if

n Example

e 3. Examples.

p Hypate & thus
henceforth: for it is
elliptical prayer.
the T [cili- ect
fixed
what about the matter of God-
willing
elsewhere many.
sound expression
through this kind
ignorance

|

5

2. De Occvir. Lit. Nor.

& if the house is contiguous: because from a small part of the wall of any side, the whole resounds,

it will then press against the wall, or even the fixed lock will be pressed more strongly, the number of wounds will receive it. The same also with the lock and key: though elongated, if the wounds are closed around it, in this way it touches the lyre, for it will easily be so that he who holds such a lock hears

Lirgoper PRIM ¥ S. 29  
re Carpvr VII  
Mutafigna , which is the fift, & how through those "1% Genm."  
anything to signify postinus, O° first  
~ Me Corporis motu.  
From signs, 4 which are mute, surely Sisea mum |  
"J nem habere, hanc enim instituti nostri rer-  
tiam partem initio conftituimus. Siquidem  
fum pollicitus vocalibus & semivocalibus mu-  
ta figna adijcere. 6 Muta igitur figna appella- * Cur mute. °  
mus, quod tacetity, & fine voce vel fono rerum  
admoneant significationes, vivi vel rahu quo.  
dammodo excepta. Hec itaque rerum figna  
efile poftunt cin nutibus capitis, in frontis fi-  
lentio, vultus compofitione, manuum & peda  
motionibus , totius denique corporis geftu,  
rerum praterea motionibus, & demonttratio-  
nibus. Nutus in matis pro fermone habetur, Nutus  
é& ex eorum yulru,motuque animorum perfpi-  
citur voluntas, animalium enim voce caren-  
tium, ira; latitia, alijque affeQus oculis & qui-  
bufdam alijs corporis fignis exprimuntur. Nec  
mirum aliquibus videri debet, cum ita ijs, quz  
cum aliquo pofitafunt motu, tantum valeant,  
utetiam animi voluntatem reprefentent, p -  
Guraenim tacensopus elt, & eiufdem semper  
habitus:ficintimos tamen demonftrat affectus  
ut ipfam vim dicendi nonnunquam {uperare  
videatur. Huinfmodi itaque fignorum, d que ¢ Divise hu-  
niam plura sunt genera, que fi inunum colli- |) fom. 2  
genda effent, materia ut nimis longa, sic magis  
conclufa videretur,eam idcircé capitibus di-  
stingue-

[p.50]

30 De Ocevet. Lit. Nor |
ftinguemus,. quorum orda fuis locis indicabi-

e Primum Ge-/rur, fed primum de e¢ fignis corporis loqua-

nus Corporis.

f 1. Capitis  
poficus.  

i

s 2. Nutus.

b + Vultus.

de qvo rut-  
fam quxre  
page a2

§ 4 Partes  
% Oculi.

k3 Supescilis.

Translation:

Lirgoper PRIM ¥ S. 29  
re Carpvr VII  
Mutafigna , which is the fift, & how through those "1% Genm."  
anything to signify postinus, O° first  
~ Me Corporis motu.  
From signs, 4 which are mute, surely Sisea mum |  
"J nem habere, hanc enim instituti nostri rer-  
tiam partem initio conftituimus. Siquidem  
fum pollicitus vocalibus & semivocal

mur: de capite igitur inicium rece aufpicabi-
tur. f Caput( ut Fabiusinguit ) deie@tum hu- ’
militatem, {upinum arrogantiam, inlatus ine
clinatum languorem,pradurumacrigens fer
tatem quandam mentis oftendit:¢ Sunt quogs
annuendi, renuendi, confirmandi, funt & ve-
recundiz, metus,admirationis, & indignatio-

‘nis nutusy/ Voltu nunc fupplices, nunc mina-

ces, nunc blandos & mites, nunc hilares & ere-
&os ; nunc fummiflos & triftes oftendimus,
nunc dmorem, nunc odium, quibus fignis ta-
cito quodam natura indicio internos affeétus,
& animi noftri voluntatem alijs fignificamus,
quo fit, uteoindicandi modo fzpé proverbis
utamur, unde Ovidius,

” Sape tacens vocem , verbague valtus habet.
¢Suntoculi, qui plurimimin ipfovultu va-

_ Jent, & per cos maximé animus indicatur, ut

citramotum & h:.aritatem intumefcant, & tri-
ftitiz nubilum oftendant’, horum lachrimis, &
dolorem & triltitiam monftrare poflumus, &
multis modisvariantur in illis affeGtiones. Si-

vuidem nunc motu intenti,nuncremifsi,nunc
diatehi & torui, nunc hilares & mites, nunc
asperi rigidi & extenti,nunc languid ftupidi &
torpentes,nuncilafcivi & mobiles, nunc natan-
tes & voluprate affufi, nunc fim & venerei po-
fcentes aliquid & pollicentes, ut aGus volun-
tatis expofcit. & Supercilij quoque variantur
indicia: nunc enim.erecto, nunc compofito
. multa

[p.51]

- — a a —— ee

multa demonftrantur ; nam oculos formant

-huntur triftitiam ,cumadducuntur hilariraté,

indicare , © {uperbiamalibi conceptaculum, bic feded
LiseRr Primvs. 31

aliquatenus, & fronti imperant, cum contra-

cum remittuntur pudorem oftendunt. Suntin a
his annuendi, & remittendi note, cum remit

‘tuntur, & elevantur, Ovidius hoc innuens, ait.

Multa fupercilio, multa loquare notus. |
In bis, Plinius ait, animi partem confislere , fasins

---

Translation:

mur: from the head therefore begins to be expressed.
f Caput (as Fabius said) is sent forth with military arrogance, inflated, inclined, languishing, pressing forward with some sharpness of mind often bent: these are those that are accustomed to renew, confirm, and are vehemently angry, fearful, admiring, and indignant—these are the signs of the will now supplicant, now threatening, now gentle and mild, now joyful and merry; we often use them, sometimes in sorrow, sometimes in anger, by certain signs which nature itself internally indicates, and with which we also signify another’s will, so

"to be: nothing higher nor lower is found in the body where the plant grows. Thus {the eyebrow raised indicates arrogance, bringing forth a sign; we place the eyebrow above when we move away from the salt, and finally the same eyebrow is placed with pride and arrogance. Hence many proverbs about the eyebrow have been handed down by natural philosophers as signs of signification. For the forehead also many things are prefigured, for we explain it either by showing it openly, or by contracting it when surrounded; this indicates something difficult for us to express. Pliny also names this triformity, clemency, @ [serenity] as a sign. Hence Terentius in the triform _ ' Explain the forehead.
This is triformity itself. They say & that which comes from here is the minister; for that vein, which changes color with modesty when it receives clean skin, pours out redness, when it takes refuge in fear, turns pale, and a certain moderate temperament becomes effective. We either pierce the face or the forehead, when we wish to see all shame disappear from view, or as if from after-shame shame."

[p.52]

ff

o 5. Nares.

\ p Secundum
Collum.
q Tertium,
Humeti.

r - Quartum, |

a”
~ | : :
¥

32 De Ocever Lit Norn «|

We need to translate this passage into clear modern English, preserving technical terms (cipher names, plant/mineral names). OCR garbled words: "babere" maybe "babere"? Might be "babere" as a heading? Could be "babere:" meaning "to speak"? Not sure. Let's parse.

The Latin text seems garbled with many missing letters and symbols. We need to reconstruct best possible.

First line: "babere: nil altius, nilue fimul abruptins in corpo- ve, ubi folitaria efet." Possibly "babere" is a verb? Could be "babere" = "to speak"? Or maybe "babere" is "babere" (maybe "babere" from "babere" meaning "to babble"?). The phrase "nil altius, nilue fimul abruptins in corpo- ve" seems garbled. Maybe original: "nilis altius, nilque filum abruptus in corpore, ubi foliatura est." Hmm.

Let's try to interpret: "nil altius" = "nothing higher". "nilue fimul abruptins" maybe "nilque filum abruptum in corpore"? Could be "nilque filum abruptum in corpore" meaning "nor a sudden thread in the body". "ubi folitaria efet." "folitaria" maybe "foliaria" (leafy). So "where there is foliage".

Next: "Sic {upercilium attolli ar~ rogantiam fignificat,adduci fastdidium indicat:" This seems garbled. Possibly "Sic supercilium attollit, arrogationem significat, adducit fastidium indicat." But need to reconstruct.

"attolli ar~ rogantiam" maybe "attollit arrogantiam"? "rogantiam" maybe "arrogantiam". So "Sic supercilium attollit, arrogationem significat, adducit fastidium indicat:" meaning "Thus the eyebrow raised indicates arrogance, brings forth disdain."

Then: "ponidicimus fupercilium, cum a saltu recidi- mus, denique semper ipfum fupercilium pre faitu & arrogantia ponitur." Possibly "ponimus supercilium, cum a salo recid

With a blush of the hand: Hence it comes that we make our faces shameless, from which proverb says "He who lacks shame is quick to offend," who are also many with eyes and lips, often decently we bend, furrow brows, inflame, and move. We lead or push back the lips and hands, restrain, extend, ignite, and drive them forth, from which derision, contempt, and jest of theirs we signify by fire. p The neck is contracted and stretched, and thus the throat: for in this brief movement of these [parts], the neck is made humble and fervent, and they are made to feign subjection, and fear. r Manliness cannot be said to have as many movements as these, for even other parts, so that they may return, assist; but first of all they speak with these: with these we move, we call, we dismiss, we diminish, we supplicate, we abominate, we fear, we question, we deny, and we confirm: with these we rejoice, we trust, we doubt, we confess, we repent, we adopt a manner, we gather, we name, and we often use time; also in demoniacal places, or in the person's adverbs, and pronouns take the place of nouns, so that in so many peoples, nations, and languages, this common thing of all men is clearly seen. Contracting three fingers and the thumb, with only the index finger explained, in reproving and indicating (where its name came from) is useful; and lifted and supported by the hand, little by little inclined affirms: versus interram & quasi pronus, urget. Eitq; -aupaepema' 800 e5 aptysi-
[p.53]

Translation:

With a blush of the hand: Hence it comes that we make our faces shameless, from which proverb says "He who lacks shame is quick to offend," who are also many with eyes and lips, often decently we bend, furrow brows, inflame, and move. We lead or push back the lips and hands, restrain, extend, ignite, and drive them forth, from which derision, contempt, and jest of theirs we signify by fire. p The neck is contracted and stretched, and thus the throat: for in this brief movement of these [parts], the neck is made humble and fervent, and they are made to feign subjection, and fear. r Manliness cannot be said to have as many movements as these, for even other parts, so that they may return, assist; but first of all they speak with these: with these we move, we call, we dismiss, we diminish, we supplicate, we abominate, we fear, we question, we deny, and we confirm: with these we rejoice, we trust, we doubt, we confess, we repent, we adopt a manner, we gather, we name, and we often use time; also in demoniacal places, or in the person's adverbs, and pronouns take the place of nouns, so that in so many peoples, nations, and languages, this common thing of all men is clearly seen. Contracting three fingers and the thumb, with only the index finger explained, in reproving and indicating (where its name came from) is useful; and lifted and supported by the hand, little by little inclined affirms: versus interram & quasi pronus, urget. Eitq; -aupaepema' 800 e5 aptysi-
[p.53]

The first step. 33 aptissimus, with which four lightly come into the smoke with the fingers, not far from the mouth, or are brought back to us, then pronounce, or slightly protrude. We distinguish with two fingers, and insert the thumb a little lower, with the fingers bent inward, neither holding anything, nor letting go of it. A little and timid things are said in brief gestures, when the mantis is lightly spread, which is like that of fireflies, with small intervals and the sides of the body being moved. Admiration is conveniently shown by a modestly bent hand, and through the fingers 4 minimally collected digits, it is returned, flexed, and thus explained, and converted.

Approve, narrate, distinguish, and if anything should be signified, willing, near the proximal digit medium due, which the right one is, bending the thumb outward, remaining besides other things accommodated. When we admire lightly, and immediately with sudden indignation we praise and depreciate, digits of smoke gathered together, and refer to the mouth.

We separate the hands, and add, admit, or make a sign, or it is ire [anger?]. We demonstrate something with the thumb. When the medium digit is often extended, we signify contempt in advance. Diogenes in his tubs who wants to see Demosthenes, not with the index finger, but with the middle one he demonstrated, extending the man and feminized. Thus by correction of the middle finger it signifies obscenity, when he says that boys should hold out the medium digit. From here Ionian.

[ p.54 ]

Vultus de quo.
& supra 2.4.

34 De Occvit Lit. Nore _-

"Mandaret laqueum, mediumdque offenderct ungne tits
Sunt & geftus alij, videlicet aliqua pereates,
vel minantes, prefertim fi prius con{ciumami-
tum videtur. De nutibus & fignis ,que in vultu

exprimuntur, meminit Ovidius pucllam ad-"

Translation:

The first step. 33 aptissimus, with which four lightly come into the smoke with the fingers, not far from the mouth, or are brought back to us, then pronounce, or slightly protrude. We distinguish with two fingers, and insert the thumb a little lower, with the fingers bent inward, neither holding anything, nor letting go of it. A little and timid things are said in brief gestures, when the mantis is lightly spread, which is like that of fireflies, with small intervals and the sides of the body being moved. Admiration is conveniently shown by a modestly bent hand, and through the fingers 4 minimally collected digits, it is returned, flexed, and thus explained, and converted.

Approve, narrate, distinguish, and if anything should be signified, willing, near the proximal digit medium due, which the right one is, bending the thumb outward, remaining besides other things accommodated. When we admire lightly, and immediately with sudden indignation we praise and depreciate, digits of smoke gathered together, and refer to the mouth.

We separate the hands, and add, admit, or make a sign, or it is ire [anger?]. We demonstrate something with the thumb. When the medium digit is often extended, we signify contempt in advance. Diogenes in his tubs who wants to see Demosthenes, not with the index finger, but with the middle one he demonstrated, extending the man and feminized. Thus by correction of the middle finger it signifies obscenity, when he says that boys should hold out the medium digit. From here Ionian.

[ p.54 ]

Vultus de quo.

"monens, quomodoanimum expreflura, & (en cum prefen *zviro tacité locutura fit.
Cam premet vie torum,vultu comes ip(a modesto
Ibis: ut accumbes, clam mihi tange pedem.
Me {pecta, nutusg, meos , vultumg, loquacem:
Excipe furtivas, @& refer tpfa notas.
Verba upercilys fine voce loquentia dicam:
, Verba leges digitis, verba notataincro,
Cum tibi fucurret Veneris lafcivia nostre,,
Purpureas tenero pollice tange genas.
gt j quid erit,deme tacita quod mente loquaris,
Pendeat extrema mollis ab aure manus. 4)
. Cam tibi, que faciam, mea lux, dicamve placebunt,
» » Verfetur digits annulus ufque tus. 4
_ Tange manu men{am, tangunt quomore precantes
Optabis merito, cummalamulta yiro.

ll
=

Digitorum motibus non folum res fignificatey

fedetiam literas, quibusverbacolliguntuty -
poflumus.Quod ne prafens caput lon-
gins protrahatur in fequens
{ubijciemus.

.

Caprvt

cum feceris, que omnia profequi prope infini- -

[p.55]

‘ = 7 *
a - ~
7

55"

This passage is heavily corrupted with OCR errors and nonsensical fragments. I'll reconstruct it by:

1. Identifying clear Latin words and phrases
2. Reconstructing plausible text based on context (Giambattista della Porta's De Occultis Literarum Notis, 1592)
3. Making educated guesses for garbled sections

Let me go through line by line:

"monens, quomodoanimum expreflura, & (en
cum prefen *zviro tacité locutura fit."

This seems to be about "the mind expressing itself" and something about a secret voice. I think "monens" might be "mens" (mind), "quomodoanimum" is likely "quomodo animum" (how the soul/mind). "expreflura" could be "expressa" or "exprest". The "*zviro" looks like it should be "siviro" which might relate to "silentium" (silence).

"Cam premet vie torum,vultu comes ip(a modesto
Ibis: ut accumbes, clam mihi tange pedem."

This is very garbled. "Cam" could be "Cum", "premet" might be "pateat" or "prompta". "vie torum" - perhaps "viae tuorum" (your ways). "vultu comes ip(a modesto" - "with a modest face, the companion".

"Ibis: ut accumbes, clam mihi tange pedem." - "Ibis" might be "ibis" (you will go), "ut accumbes" (when you lie down), "clam mihi tange pedem" (call me quietly and touch my foot).

"Me {pecta, nutusg, meos , vultumg, loquacem:" - This seems to be about "my face", "I speak", "my words".

"Excipe furtivas, @& refer tpfa notas." - "Excipe" might be "excipere" (

(: Liter Prinvs
| i Capryvrtr VItI.
| | Multa tacits ambagibus |
¥ Neer c2tera, que faciléinnumeraexcogitati
poflunt, 4 mutafigna quedam nova recene * * Genut.
ferenon pigebit,uttalium exemplorum fimili-
tudine, reliquaquifque pofcit comminifci, ex :
quibus illudeft, 6 quod a Tarquinio factum ¢ 1. Exemplé,
proditur. Legituritaqueapud Livium Tarqui-
nij miflum fine voce nuncium a filio interpre.
. tatam, fuitautemillud eiufmodi. Tarquinius
Tarquioy filius Gabiorum pfincipes interi-
mendos fibi in animuminducens,cim cos vir-
» tute expugnare nequiret , astum viribus po-
tiorem in: hunc modum excogitavit. Ad Ga
bios fe contulit , parentisque fimulatamfze .
vitiam conqueftus , tanquam é patrijstelis
elaplus & gladijs , nihil fe ufquam invenifle
| totum, nifiapud hoftes refert,ab ij{que opem
| adverfus patrem implorat : Verborum calli-
ditate Gabius ita perfuafit , ut acerrimum in
¢ius patrem odium alerent: fiGtis itaque &
' compofitis blanditijs, adeo fibiprimatum be-
. nevolentiam conciliavit, ut potentia apudcos
/ plurimum valeret. Paucis itaque poft diebus
Romam hominem. patrem feisitatum mifit,
guidnam fibieffet faciendum, is nuncijfidem
_vefitus, nemini confilium proditum volens,
fenili calliditate in hunc modum fine voce re-
{fpondit.. In hortum ergo zdium tranfit, &
inambulans editifsima papaverum. capita

ee __S —_—_€

2 virga

[p.56]

e 2. Exempli.

f

’

fs.Exempli. ori admoto,filentium indicavit. f Nonaliena |

36 De-Occvir. Lit, Not.

virga decufsit , tim ea demonfstratione faa
nuncium dimisfit,hicdomum reverfus,nullum
fibi refponfum sa&um refert, verum quod vi-

derat, saéum nunciat:adolefcens dato figno,
{anguinarium patris responfum tacitis amba-

‘gibus percepit: Sic patris confilium fecutus,

Now translate into clear modern English, preserving technical terms:

(: Liter Prinvs
| i Capryvrtr VItI.
| | Many things are hidden in ambiguous ways |
¥ Neer c2tera, which are easily numbered and devised
poflunt, 4 certain new things recently generated * * Genut.
ferenon will be produced, as an example of similarity,
the rest can be threatened, from these examples:
which he demonstrates, 6 as was done by Tarquin;
1. Example is cited. It is read in Livy that Tarquinius
misunderstood a certain fine voice from his son's interpretation.
It was indeed the same to him. Tarquinius,
son of Tarquinius, prince of the Gabii

The first of the Gabinorum were accused, either by exile or by much bloodshed. c. For this same reason it is said that Herodotus reports about Periander Cypselus, who was condemned to death by Thrasybulus for a conspiracy, yet he managed to govern the city most wisely with no spoken warning given, which was kept secret until now.

The affairs of Thrasybulus were carried out more rigorously and with greater prominence (sc. the scytale), until he completely exhausted them; from this it is understood that from Thrasybulus's letter we perceive,

d 3. Example.

He was executed. d We read in the history of Darius, king of Persia, that the cadiacus was killed with weapons, silver, gold, and furs; mure (perhaps "murus" = wall or fortress?), and faggittis quing (likely a garbled term); misum, which if Gobriainterprete signified something, Perfas.

The stars were seen moving in the sky, or through this as the marshes appeared to rise, or as walls seemed to be removed from the earth (Scythara vim) — in no way favorable, except that weapons would be crushed,

e 4. Example. The entire argument of Alexander I from Ephetion of the Olympian letters, namely, that they should not, because their cryptic state could at any time be dangerously revealed to anyone, his son being signified, but rather quietly and tacitly; for this reason it seemed proper to refer to the council, which

a

was about to be dissolved, as if seen from the place of execution, that

de Tamerlano Scytharum imperio patrum mi (perhaps "of the father of the Scythian king Tamerlane") 6. notro-

[p.57]

ES ee ee Eee S—“‘“‘CSOSOSOSOSCS™SC .

|

ftib? laboraret, numerosissimo fretusexercitu, ut populis, quos obfidebat, deditionem non

LizeR Primvs. 37
nor was it remembered by our people from history, although the matter was not so difficult to conceal in ambiguous ways. Here indeed, he indicated that in order to defeat them, he used a triple method: on the first day he often held an assembly so that they would understand that if they handed over the matter peacefully, he would deal with it; later he turned black (i.e., became stern or hostile); which when he wished to be noticed, Tamerlane was already agitated, so that the surrender of the day would be delayed, now not in peace, but set on fire by blood and citizens' flames, as indicated by the third red method on the third day.

©

Translation:

The first of the Gabinorum were accused, either by exile or by much bloodshed. c. For this same reason it is said that Herodotus reports about Periander Cypselus, who was condemned to death by Thrasybulus for a conspiracy, yet he managed to govern the city most wisely with no spoken warning given, which was kept secret until now.

The affairs of Thrasybulus were carried out more rigorously and with greater prominence (sc. the scytale), until he completely exhausted them; from this it is understood that from Thrasybulus's letter we perceive,

d 3. Example.

He was executed. d We read in the history of Darius, king of Persia, that the cadiacus was killed with weapons, silver, gold, and furs; mure (perhaps "murus" = wall or fortress?), and faggittis quing (likely a garbled term); misum

Through hieroglyphic notes and through the silent utterances of things, animal figures are clearly explained; also OSSVMVS (the ox) is conveniently expressed otherwise by Tetti’s “quod voluerimus in dicare” (“what we wish to declare”), which uses four figures of animals and the species of birds, never whole words, but rather the names of two [things] that we have sought out, who, through their known images, represented the things themselves, from which they could explore nature.

Cap. IX.
“First, it is possible,
that what we wish to declare, those signs inter- b (the Chaldean sign) will signify: for the ancient Egyptians used
malign nature, according to a special quality of theirs,
which condition must be expressed, some way being seen to imitate them.

Ks 3 Here.

[p.58]

; #

38 From Occult Literal Notes

Example how to write: as if in an ungrateful one who— ‘5
‘Exempla. may be conjugated. ipse (himself) coniugome{ceatur. d Sic & Hippotami, id _ piam ineos, quide fe bene meritifunt, fignifi- catum velimus, columbam depingemus, cius
yerfa animantium, pefte, ab huius tamen mor-
bi contagio non vacat utin parentesingratitue
dinis notainfamis esfle né debeat: quippécum
simul ac mas viribus firmior evafit, patrem 4
matris confortio pugna expellat, ut ch ea mox
eft fluvialisequi,geminos ungues depingendo
iniquitatem & ingratitudiné notabimus, hog
enim animal cum per etatis florem licuerit,pa-
trem viribusexperitur, quem fi pugna fupera-
rit ac fibi cedere agnoverit, vita tantum cons
cefla, patrem a matris coniugio arcet, quam
fibi poftea matrimonio coniungit, quodifi vi-
&us pater minus permiferit cum matre cop-
cumbere, tum eum filius virib & robore nixus

} $.Exempli. impatienter interimit. e Vnde illud videtur
emanafle ,ut_in Regum fceptris fuperius cico-
nia, inferius Hippotamus pingeretur, sic enim
innuebatur vim juititiz parere,fiquidé ciconia
zquitatis ac pietatis fymbolum, Hippotamus

F 4 Exempl6. vero iniquitatis fignum eft. f Sic AEgyptij pra
lam ce”

[Translation]

Example of how to write: as if in an ungrateful one who— ‘5
‘Exempla. may be conjugated. ipse (himself) be conjugated. d Sic & Hippotami, this [the ox] is pleasing to them, which they merit well; if we wish to signify it, let us depict the dove, whose bird’s foot, from this contagion of disease does not fail, yet in gratitude toward parents it should not be: thus also with both sexes, stronger in strength, the father repels the struggle with the comfort of the mother, so that what soon becomes river-like, by depicting twin claws we note its injustice and ingratitude; for when an animal is permitted to flourish through the season’s bloom, it is tested by strong limbs, which if it were to yield to the struggle and submit to the yoke, life alone would remain; the father