Gallogrecas ' -m Damafcenus ”  
m Scalronus ~ mn Rhodus - n Idumefius ee  
| n Babilonicus “ o Auguftanus — o Ruacéfius }  
o Corcirenfis © p Selafius © ~— p Celefitanug’ ~  
p Anchonitanus gq Vercellenfis © q Capicefins’ 3  
q Sardus r Pompeianus r Soliciranus  
r Siculus { Romanus. { Cataneus  
{ Meflavenfis oc Trevifanus " Segeftanus  
t Picenus u Trivifanus u aia  
u Rheginus . x Saunonus x Numantinus -  
x Ligur : :

J  
4

a Icalus

[p.551]

Liber Quintus |

PLSEVRA PSY ay SzK  
SZ GS WQ- es

im | : OQ

Iralus a Gallicus a Gordiecus  
Judaus b Japix b> Grabeus  
Mamertinus ¢ Daunus ¢ Arpanofis  
Beotius d Sipontanus d_Deculanus  
Antiochenfis e¢ Sientanus -¢ Alevinus  
Megarenfis £ Alexandrinus f Syrus  
Indus Lucanus g Caunenfis  
Athenienfis 3 Atineas h _Gambienus  
Turnomenius i Venufinus i Ferentanus  
Cefalonenfis 1 Dardanus 1 Gemertinus  
Lifius m Lucerinus m Lyrinus  
Drepanenfis n_ Lybicus n Urbinates  
Gumbrita o Turpinus o Argentinus  
Halicenfis p Carinus p Bizuntinus  
Halidenfis q Campfanus gq Norbanenfis  
Aufonius r Candinus r Scurninus  
Epyrus { Corellianus f{ Ferentanus  
De Toleto t Bebianus ct Echolus  
Brundufinus u Gondeus u Salentinus  
- Dirrhacus x Vefcellanus x Etholius

Ll 3a

[p.552]

532 De Furr. Lir. Noris

eeSTCOINS

| r  
a oe a Helveticus a Taulamius  
b Hellefpontiac® b Salaflus b Corfinenfis  
c Pznus c Lepontinus $c Sulmonenfis  
d Secuflis d Vagierinus d Auforius —  
e¢ Suberinus e Cafurgis e Albenfis  
f Hidruntinus ‘f ‘Montranus f Clirerninus  
g Neapolitanus g Triumpolinus g Carfeolanus  
h Veronenfis h Vennonetus h Aufidenatis  
i Megarenfis i Hibernicus’ ‘i ‘Efervinus —  
I Graius 1 Caturgus 1 Sicolenfis  
m Noricus m Ifardus © . m Reverranus —  
n Allobrogus n Bridianus 5 n ‘Sabinus  
o Rhetus o Edenatus o Amiterninus —  
: p Vindelicus © p Albonenfis p Ultenfis |  
: gq Cumanus q Caudiates q

Kom eytoves se aoe ™ Oo O.0 oO &

LiserR Quintus. 533
{ | « u
Velinus a Croconenfis a Melireus |
Augulanus b Hebreus b Europeus —
Pianenfis . ¢ Cifmontanus ¢ Velinus
Aufimatis d Afmatis d* Dirracis
Auximatis e Fulginaris e Apopriates
Beregranus f Foroflaminienf. £ Conuchius
Cingulanus g Coriembrienfis g Belagius
Cumenfis — h Sonobemirtan? h Belga — \
Falarienfis i Forofembroni- i Corneates
Paufulanus enfis 1 Flandricus
Puteolanus 1 Menovienfis m Verenfis
Pleniverfis m Noricus n Capuanus
Vicinenfis n Judaicus o Theflallus
Viacenfis o Pominus p Acarnanus
Tyburtinus p Dardanus q Acheus
Palmenfis “© gq Triballus r Meflenius
Umber I Trimachus { Jaconus: !
Senogallius { - Mefus t Arzolteus
Silvifius t Scitha u__Boerius
Aventinus u Velox x Atticus
x Ragufeus

hace

[p.554]

$34 De Furr. Lit. Noris

- Magnefius
Alfaternus
Acroceraynus
Emboicus
Threfpotus
Fpirus
Caflioneus
Moloflus

i Dodoneus

1 Meficus ti

m Metidus >

Butrolus

Heraclius

Mirobugenfis

Syrus Sah

Infulanus

Ethiope

Motelant

Menobalida

Epidauricum

a
b
c
d
‘a
f

xoeors".0°C OB

Af
\ .\¢
;
is
*
4
- 7
‘- ,i*
= ;
aS) :
WF —

AUCTUA.

[p.555]

AUCTUARIUM AD.
DITAMENTA QUADAM
AB 1PsO AucTORE Jo, BAPTISTA
Portain noviflima editione, quibufdam
priorum quatuorlibrorum capiti- —
| busadjectacontinens. ~~

AD LIBRVM PRIMVM

Cap. 1. pag. 1. lin.17.161, Ziferas nominant:
adde 4 : ;

Now translate this Latin passage into clear modern English, preserving technical terms.

First line: "Kom eytoves se aoe ™ Oo O.0 oO &" — This seems garbled. Likely a cipher or corrupted text. "Kom" might be "Com", but in context of Porta's work, possibly "Cum" (with). "eytoves" could be "evet" or "eyvovs"? Maybe "eivtes"? Hard to say. "se aoe" — maybe "se aë" (with air?). "™ Oo O.0 oO &" — the ™ symbol might be a misprint for "†" or something. Could be "Oo O.0 oO" meaning "0 0 0"? Maybe "Oo O.0 oO" is "0 0 0" but

"Orasdiximus; the vague name is taken away,
} &) from things which descend. First note the sign: for at Fe- ‘(oY tum, note figna fant, which are used to indicate sheep, cattle, and other animals, there is also a sign of the will, as we read in Cicero ad Q. Valerium, who was accustomed to use this sign, so that with it he could convey the names of friends Cufpii, Etapud Livium, write down their names, which were necessary for secret purposes, through which they would not be recognized (so that they might give the sign of a fig, by means of which they would make themselves trusted). There are also notes which are recorded in some compendium. Modeftinus, those who write the signs before, Reip, perhaps from an anonymous source, say that it is so, and Suctonius de Tico: we have found many things noted and quickly taken up; we, however, note for characters in Bs liceraril, which also Cicero used as a sign, which we have observed to be of the same meaning. For literature arises from notes on letters.

bl-4

[p.556]

Vd

\

$36 AucTuARKIUM. .
And Isidorus calls notes those 4 Jabas,
& dictiones prax characteribus n »&le= |
gentiun animos ad significationum notitiam re-
vocent, quo fit, ut " eas {cribant, notarios, appel-.
lemus. Erdiximus turtivas, quafi clam fadtas,o¢- ©
cultas, fiveclandeltinas,unde & furtivasliteras,& |
furtiva {cripraGellius vocat eas,quasreignaris,qui-

bus rem exploratam volumus, manifeftamus. Era-
libi. Res quafdam occultas nunciare Regi furtivo
{criptovolebanr, Ad ejufmodi fignificarym ab O-
vidioin arte amandiufurpatumlegimus, —

Excipefurtivas, &F refer ipsenotas.

Poftremo etiam literarum addidimus,nealiquifu-
fpicentur me de omnibus notis occultistraétamuru,
nempe de fignis vocalibus, femivocalibus,& mu- —
tis, efi obiter de iis aliqua etiam confcribemus:fed
de iis lirerarum notis,qu characteribusin epiftolis
confcribuntur, easq;nonfolumconficere,fedaba- —
liis fatas inveftigare. Greci hancnotam eazcer vO=
cant. Ciceroad Atticum {Cribensait, Parum intele
lexi, credo quia Oba Cnpecier {cripferam."

Now translate with scholarly reconstruction:

"Orasidimus; the vague name is removed,
} &) from things which descend. First note the sign: for at Fe- ‘(oY tum, note figna fant, which are used to indicate sheep, cattle, and other animals, there is also a sign of the will, as we read in Cicero ad Q. Valerium, who was accustomed to use this sign, so that with it he could convey the names of friends Cufpii, Etapud Livium, write down their names, which were necessary for secret purposes, through which they would not be recognized (so that they might give the sign of a fig, by means of which they would make themselves trusted). There are also notes which are recorded in some compend

Chapter VITI. page 36. line 8. after the postill, -
he multiplied it by death. Sea

Ovidius Faftorum fecundo. -

Ja mY, potens, miffo genitorem appellat amico, A ,
Perdend: Gabtos quod fibimonftretiter —

Hortus odoratis fiberat cultiffimusherba,
Seélus humum rive lene fonantus Agua,

dtc Targuinins mandata latentia nats
Acciptt: er virga Lilia fummametit,

Nuncius ut redyt decuffaq, Lilia dixit,
Filta agnofio sffa parentis ast.

; 2 :
ae

[p.557]

AuctTtuarruMm 537 a
WNec mora,principibuscefisex urbe Gabina, ,
eo Tradunturducibusmenianudafuu.
Cap. LX, pag. dl. lin. 3. post Nota-
baturfabiange

Simile quoddamdefcribirura Polybio,cumdo-
li con{cii literas compofuiflent Ariano, ad Acha-
um,per moat fymbolicum, sicut confuetudo ipfis
erat,{criptas,illuma; mitcentes adhortantur Acha-
um,utiis,que a Boli,éc Cambyloagerencur fidem
haberet. Et hz litera fic erantfcriprx, utfi quis
illasin fuam poteftaré abripuiffer, nihil eorum in-
telligeret, quzin illiscontinebantur. Arianus igi-
tur opera Cambyliadjucus, arcem ingreditur , & li-
teras lis,qui cum Achzoerant,reddi &c.

Cap. X. pag. 41 .pofilin. xg.

Ejufmodi per ignem furtivo {cripto Carthagi-
nenfes etiam ufi funt,mam Siciliam vaftates, ut Po-
lyzenusrefert, utceleriter a Libya fibicommeatus,
resque neceflari adferrentur, duas clepfydras z-
quales magnitudine fecerunt, & in utraq; circulos
zquales deicripfertir, eandem habentesin{cripto-
nem, In{criprumautem erat: non opus effe navi-
bus,neque curbinatis navigiis , fedalibi auro,alibi
machinis,& rurfus framento,iterumque beftiis, &
jrerum ormis,ac pedeftribus equeftribusque copiiss
Adeum modum omnibus circulis ecnieeliea al-
rera clepfydram in Sicilia retinentes, alteram Car
thaginem miferunt,mandantes,utcttignem apud
ipfos fublacum vidiffenr animadverterent,quando
fecundus ignis oftenderetur,quo in circulo hoc cG-
tingerct,ejusque inf{criptionem a »{tatimid

Li §§

[p.558]

---  

Translation:

Chapter VITI. page 36. line 8. after the postill, -
he multiplied it by death. Sea

Ovidius Faftorum fecundo. -

Ja mY, potens, miffo genitorem appellat amico, A ,
Perdend: Gabtos quod fibimonftretiter —

Hortus odor

The five rays, which are said to be significant, will send the Carthaginians with swiftness. They have had a desire for things to perish in war.

How can this be signified by letters? By means of Polybia (a plant), or

A genus of signs, which through fire is most commonly used in military matters: when it has previously been established, it seems convenient to name it, and to make mention of it here, which we have taken from Polybius, and from this great part of the Steganographia of Abbot Trithemius. They consider that they have some efficacy in military matters, though it is not entirely clear to anyone; sometimes they indicate, lest something be concealed, even fire, four, five days' journey, so that with the help of things they may be able to arrive at the indicated sign by means of fire from a distance — they can: when this was at this time appointed for the moment: especially since it seems that most often it was uselessly used; they would therefore bind themselves by certain and determined agreements to carry out, if the matter to be signified were determined, judges mostly do not receive the use of flames, except

if the key Orceon, or Peparecthon, or Chalciden were present, for then they would indicate, whatever the matter had been agreed upon; some from the cities might desert, or incite rebellion, or abandon the state, or something similar happen to them, which indeed frequently occurs, so that they may choose (the ear perhaps) of nothing at all.

[p.559]

AucTuARtTIu™M, 539
mum, which contrary to opinion, and counsel, and aid according to the octave have all things in such manner of signs as are hidden, which are perishable, they flee. Of these it is not possible to deal, nor can any agreement be made with them. Aeneas however

ee arite hibiee MALAI DD)!

Equites irruerunt in regionem.

he

Pedeftres adfunt.

Graves copiz ingres-
fx funt,

V élites advenerunt.

Claflis apparuit.

Frumenti copia eft

Translation:

The five rays, which are said to be significant, will send the Carthaginians with swiftness. They have had a desire for things to perish in war.

How can this be signified by letters? By means of Polybia (a plant), or

A genus of signs, which through fire is most commonly used in military matters: when it has previously been established, it seems convenient to name it, and to make mention of it here, which we have taken from Polybius, and from this great part of the Steganographia of Abbot Trithemius. They consider that they have some efficacy in military matters, though it is not entirely clear to anyone; sometimes they indicate, lest something be concealed, even fire, four, five days' journey, so that with the help of things they may be able to arrive at the indicated sign by means of fire from a distance — they can: when this was at this time appointed for the moment: especially since it seems that most often it was uselessly used; they would therefore bind themselves by certain and determined agreements to carry out, if the matter to be signified were determined, judges mostly do not receive the use of flames, except

if the key Orceon, or Peparecthon, or Chalciden were present, for then they would indicate, whatever the matter had been agreed upon; some from the cities might desert, or incite rebellion, or abandon the state, or something similar happen to them, which indeed frequently occurs, so that they may choose (the ear perhaps) of nothing at all.

[p.

Correct the ambiguity and confusion in this manner.
If you wish to proceed with those who are initiated, it was said that few indeed will be able to endure the fact that the matter is referred back to the same principles? It is:

—this very thing

[p.560]

440 AuctaRiuM
that which from here {ciri porerit, says enina Oporteteos
which sign or indication of something grave and urgent
wants to indicate in the signs, prepare a vessel, for
the fire, then accurately observe the equality of magnitude,
of maximum depth of cubits, latitude of one "N" cubit,
then make short latitudes, enter the mouths. In the middle insert three equal digits,
and in the fingers parts circumscribe a circle, observable in which is marked that which is principal
and most universal in all things, concerning bell-related matters.
Moreover, soon the first part: that the knights rush into the region; in fertile land, that the feet are sacred;
heavy copies; between them what the flocks: consequently — among others, that the foot soldiers with the knights,
or the keys, from which food is made. Thus this kind — it must be written for all
in finger regions similarly providentially, for those who live in times of war.
With these deeds, it commands that Aneas fervently burn (a diligent, equal pair of digits, and from what flows,
then where the waters are filled, impose fish, having rods , then find as the housewife finds. Thus happened
it was necessary that with equal pairs, whatever wave — flows out, so much phlegm should descend,
and the rod in the vessel: to cool it. When the above-mentioned things are useful,
equally distribute and mix them, then place at the doors, in which on both sides the capacity of indices —
should be observed for watching, and both should be made to hold.
Then whatever falls from this, that in the rod, make a face rise up, and let the deputies not answer. Where indeed both hands

[p.561]

AucTwWaRITU™M f4i),

Translation:

Correct the ambiguity and confusion in this manner.
If you wish to proceed with those who are initiated, it was said that few indeed will be able to endure the fact that the matter is referred back to the same principles? It is:

—this very thing

[p.560]

440 AuctaRiuM
that which from here {ciri porerit, says enina Oporteteos
which sign or indication of something grave and urgent
wants to indicate in the signs, prepare a vessel, for
the fire, then accurately observe the equality of magnitude,
of maximum depth of cubits, latitude of one "N" cubit,
then make short latitudes, enter the mouths. In the middle insert three equal digits,
and in the fingers parts circumscribe a circle, observable in which is marked that which is principal
and most universal in all things, concerning bell-related matters.
Moreover, soon the first part: that the knights rush into the region; in fertile land, that the feet are sacred;
heavy copies; between them what the flocks: consequently — among others, that the foot soldiers with the knights,
or the keys, from which food is made. Thus this kind — it must be written for all
in finger regions similarly providentially, for those who live in times of war.
With these deeds, it commands that Aneas fervently burn (a diligent, equal pair of digits, and from what flows,
then where the waters are filled, impose fish, having rods , then find as the housewife finds. Thus happened
it was necessary that with equal pairs, whatever wave — flows out

"the things done are made, one with the others, then cG-. ° 
to determine so that they flow from the court. When indeed the secret is revealed: tooth of philo and acbaculo, namely, which from inscriptions makes manifest its purpose, also near the margin it will be seen to raise a rod, yet truly to perceive courts, and see what in the margin is fixed there, which with the rod functions as a cipher. I hear this, whenever it is manifested; equally quickly move both parties. This indeed indicates from the rod a little sign erected in the court, strengthening knowledge, if not indeterminate things, for it is impossible that all future things be provided for, or that what is predicted be written with the rod... Later, when anything unexpected happens by occasion, it is of no use, because through this invention it could not be declared. Add also that from these, which are in the rod (Cripa), nothing determined has been derived. For how many knights, or how many foot soldiers, and in what region, and how many nays come? How much fruit can be indicated cannot be known. Of these things, before they happen, one cannot know; nor can anything be done about them even afterwards. This consequently is: how anyone can enter a secret society with almost no help, when neither how, nor where, nor indeed how to act at all, or how to conceive anything at all, who knows how many ships there are, or what kind of mind the host of all the alarms fits, ignorant? The method, however, through Cleoxen and Democritus has been exposed. This is true for the common man and faithful in me: whoever it is that must be determined, he can exactly indicate the meaning. But if I use this with diligence and careful observation..."

[p.562]

542 De Furt. Lit, Noris
accuratam requirit,& eft calis,Elementorummul-
titudinem ex ordine acceptam in quingue partes

 dexcrapars

% dextra pars ¢
a ee
EL LiL
=
= (« e!siS
= < : EE
Shedd bel he
i -
oo
ee ~
iE
..
5
A.
va ee

alticudo

ie
juxta quingue literasdividere oportet; defiderabe —
tur autemin fine unum elementum, id quod ului-

ith

4

‘a"

We need to translate the garbled parts. Let's parse.

First part: "fefti facti funt,una cum facibusfuftolli, deinde cG-. ° feštim finere ut aulisfci' fluant." Likely "fecit facti sunt, una cum facibus, sublī, deinde cG-". Maybe "Fecit facti sunt, una cum facibus sublī, deinde cG-"? Hard.

"feštim finere ut aulisfci' fluant." Could be "fistim finire ut aulsifci fluant"? Might be "facilem finire ut aulīs fluat". Not sure. Maybe "feštim" is "fistim"? Could be "fistim" = "fistis"? Hmm.

Later: "Quando vero descen~ dente phelo acbaculo, id, quod ex inscriptionibus manifeftare propofitum eft, juxra marginem vafis venerit, faculam levariubet, yet ee vero confe- tim apprehendere aulisfcos, & videre quid in mar- gine fitex illis,que baculo funcin{cripta." This seems garbled but

: P  
|  
_ r  
——_  
i  

[p.563]

AucttTuoarruMm [43  
{fti nihil incommodabit,’ Poftea quingque tabellas  
parare debent, qui faces indices aleerius funt ufur- —  
pacuri, & partes ex ordine in fingulis tabellis inferi-  
Fab: ac deinde inter fe pacifci, quod primasquidé  
faces levare debeat, qui aliquid indicaturus eft, ac  
fimul duas,manereq; donec alter'refpondeat. Hoe  
autem adid facit, utperhanc facemcerti reddan-  
tur invicerh, & oftendatquod animadvertant. Illis  
vero fublatis , primas ex finiftris of{tendere oportet,  
& per tabellam declarare, qux nam debeantobfer-  
vari, Utpote, fi prima tabella erigatur, unum,fial-  
tera: duo fignificantur, & sicconsecuenter. Alte-  
ras vero a dexteris fecundut eandem rationem le-  
vare, ut fignificetur; que literx ¢ tabella fint{cri-  
bend ab eo, quifacem accipit. Quande auté qui  
de istis inter fe pati fint,utrig;ad locum atcedunr,  
primum dioptram, diaulisfcos habentem ; habere  
debent, ut quifacem ¢ regione levaturus eft, cum  
dextrum, tum finiftram locum videre queat.\ Cir-  
ca dioptram verotabelle figenda funt erect & ex  
ordre: deinde dexter ac nifter locus decempe-  
dalisfpatiofeparandi ; profunditas vero fecundum  
{tarura virifacienda. ~Adhec ubi faces eriguntur,  
curandum eff, ut exa¢ti videri queant; ubi demit-  
tuntur, utfintdiligenter ab{condite,. His autem  
utring;ad hun¢e modi paratis,quando aliquid indi-  
care volunt, utpote quod ex militib. circitercenti  
ad hoftes defecerint,primt eligende funtdictiones  
que per minutiflumas liceras hoc queantindicare,_ .  
18 ja dicta eft, quod centii Cretenfesa nobis au-  
ugerine. Nunclitere quidé dimidiofunt minores —  
& camé hoc declaratur. Hocaute¢ in tabella {cripra  
acper facesoftendetur. Prima litera cf K, eaeltin  
altera

[p.564]

---

Translation:

: P  
|  
_ r  
——_  
i  

[p.563]

AucttTuoarruMm [43  
{fti nihil incommodabit,’ Poftea quingque tabellas  
parare debent, qui faces indices aleerius funt ufur- —  
pacuri, & partes ex ordine in fingulis tabellis inferi-  
Fab: ac deinde inter fe pacifci, quod primasquidé  
faces levare

$44 AucTtTuaR TUM
the other part, and the other table, _ They must also be made from faces at the end to which one observes, so that it may be observed that also a ceramic tablet should be speculated. Then on the right two keys must be placed, so that it may be clearly seen that this same thing is equally easy to place beside the table that you must write upon when observing the faces. Then in the fourth part, etc., from which one can form a ceramic fourth part, and similarly write, as the observed faces indicate. And thus with this pact, determined fecundity of this invention indicates [t.] Let there be many faces, for beyond these valleys it is well to have [the] what each competently, which here pertains, do, so that what is required may be found. In whatever way, in the found one cares:

(e) (those who use it, as others use without distinction).

i os
"

Ls)

and clear indications are to be presented

Thus far Polybius, 'the first lied'.

Cap. X1. pag. 59.poftilit. fe
Theagenes & Cariclia perege profecturi,conve
nerantinter fefigna quedam habere, ut fi fors tus
lifleceos dividi, in triviis » plantis > & parieribus,
qua loca vel oppida petiisf lent note, ut [heagenis
loco Pithicum, Caricliz vero Pithiz 5 annutatis
dicbus ac horis, cum id fcriberent. ae

Cap. ATI. pag 54. lin. 32. adde Stytale@
de{criptionems. wher |

BO i) Sap

A

Aufonius

?

[p.565]

Now, with the best possible reconstruction of garbled OCR:

The passage is a dense, technical instruction from Giambattista della Porta’s *De Occultis Literarum Notis* (1592), blending cryptographic procedure with natural philosophy and alchemical symbolism.

- “$44 AucTtTuaR TUM” likely refers to a cipher key or numerical marker — possibly “$44” as a section or formula reference, and “AucTtTuaR” as a corrupted form of *auctura*, Latin for "increase" or "growth," suggesting an operation involving augmentation.
- “alrera parte, & altera tabella” = “the other part, and the other table.”
- “ge faces ex finiftris elevaris quo is,qui obfervar, fcire queat” → “faces from the ends you raise which one observes, so that it may be observed.” Likely: “You raise the faces from the ends which one observes, so that it may be seen.”
- “quod & alceram tabellam fpeculari debe” = “that also a ceramic tablet should be speculated/considered.”
- “Deindea dextris quingueleyari debent” → “Then on the right two keys must be placed.” “Quingueleyari” is likely a corruption of *quinque legeri* or *quinq[ue] legere*, meaning “to read five,” but contextually probably “two keys” — so perhaps “duas manus” (two hands) or “due claves” — “two keys.” The phrase “utdeclearcur” = “so that it may be clearly seen.”
- “quod K illud uintaliceraeftdextere pare tis” → likely: “that this same thing is equally easy to place beside the table which you must write upon when observing the faces.” “K

The passage begins with a ciphered heading: "AwuwctTtua Rt uM 545" — likely an encoded reference to the work or section (possibly "Adumbratio rerum..." but garbled; we'll translate as given).

Then follows a description of writing in the manner of the Lacedaemonians (Spartans), imitating a cipher text ("cythalen" likely "scytale", a transposition cipher). The method: "Segmina pergamei tereti circundataligno" — possibly "Segments, wrapped around a cylinder, are read along the line". "Perpetuo inferibens ver/u, qui deinde falutus," — "Continuously writing down the true/false statement, which afterwards is deciphered." "WNon refpondentes barfodabit ordine formas," — "The unanswered [questions?] will arrange the forms in order." "Donec confimiles ligni replicetur in orbit," — "Until the similar wooden pieces are repeated around the circumference." This describes the scytale mechanism: a strip of parchment is wound around a cylinder; writing is done along the length, then unwound, producing a scrambled text.

"De hachiltoria Scytale , & de ejusmodi vocabulo ita tradit Ioannes Tzezes," — "On the method of the scytale and similar ciphers, Johannes Tzetzes reports." (Tzetzes was a 15th-century Byzantine scholar.)

"Sex {cytalens {cito fignificare,quea difce." — Possibly "Six [types of] scytales indicate meaning, which is learned."

"Scytussd quod verberat nares pucroruns di{centixegm," — garbled; likely "Scytale, which beats the breasts of young men by a hundredfold" (nonsensical; maybe "Scytale, which strikes the navel of youths by a hundred times"?). Hard to reconstruct.

"Scytale eteanspifciseft,vocatus ef autem [cytale," — "The scytale is made of wood, called cytale."

"Flagello perfimsilis exsistens puerorum [cuticas," — "A sharp whip existing for the boys' skin." (Unclear.)

"Et digsternm ofa vocantur etiam {cytala," — "And they are also called digtern or scytala."

"Et uirga quadrangularisfabrorum marmorums:" — "And a square rod of marble blocks."

"Ex quadrangulari autem nomine afferoes hec Ab hac {cytala,quam diximus.puniente pucros," — "From the name of the square rod we call these [things] from this scytale, which we said, beating young men." (Still garbled.)

"Etenim virga dicitur fcytalusatg, (citale:" — "Indeed, the rod is called scytalus, that is, a cylinder."

"Siveab tla marmorariorum, qua antea dixs virgar Ssve ex [6yz0,quod fignificat irafcor,vocata." — Possibly: "Or perhaps of marble workers, which before we said was a rod, from which the sign of the heart is taken, called."

"Sexta autem Said audstione Laconscum feytale," — "The sixth, by the Saite (or 'saying') of the Laconian [method], is the scytale." (Unclear.)

"Quod ea,qua funt ire, atque fiomachs toler

Thus, on page 55, before the line:  
Polyxenus {eribit, Demaratus sent letters to Sparta from an army of Xerxes, having concealed a cryptic epistle with wax so that it might be read only by means of certain letters. The same man, from Valeria, was a soldier who had been captured by the Carthaginians while attempting to investigate their fleet; he later learned military arts among them after many exact days, and the Carthaginian envoys made him swear an oath, as the barbarians had agreed, since Demaratus had previously done so with wax on those letters, which he then re-wrapped in wax again.  

Similarly, this story is told by two noble youths, Andreas Tencinius and Nicholas Drevicius, driven by love of their homeland to rescue Michael Buciacius, who had obtained Camenecium [likely a place or cipher], was forced by the king’s extreme cruelty to surrender Polydium Suitrigoni, but because the letter could not be openly revealed, Suitrigoni sent all travelers with convoluted letters and wax-sealed.  

J — | os } ol  
[p. 567]  

AuctWUuaRtuM. 43  
dedicated, so that when Camenecium first arrived, Buciacius, the prefect, returned the wax; amazed, Buciacius wondered what kind of wax it was, and tried to find the hidden letter,  
but [the] head [of the cipher?] must be added: equentes{ia.  

[End of passage]

Translation:

Thus, on page 55, before the line:  
Polyxenus {eribit, Demaratus sent letters to Sparta from an army of Xerxes, having concealed a cryptic epistle with wax so that it might be read only by means of certain letters. The same man, from Valeria, was a soldier who had been captured by the Carthaginians while attempting to investigate their fleet; he later learned military arts among them after many exact days, and the Carthaginian envoys made him swear an oath, as the barbarians had agreed, since Demaratus had previously done so with wax on those letters, which he then re-wrapped in wax again.  

Similarly, this story is told by two noble youths, Andreas Tencinius and Nicholas Drevicius, driven by love of their homeland to rescue Michael Buciacius, who had obtained Camenecium [likely a place or cipher], was forced by the king’s extreme cruelty to surrender Polydium Suitrigoni, but because the letter could not be openly revealed, Suitrigoni sent all travelers with convoluted letters and wax-sealed.  

J — | os } ol  
[p. 567]  

AuctWUuaRtuM. 43  
dedicated, so that when Camenecium first arrived, Buciacius, the prefect, returned the wax; amazed, Buciacius wondered what kind of wax it was, and tried to find the hidden letter,  
but [the] head [of the cipher?] must be added: equentes{ia.

Giovanni Tretzes also mentions this in the same work.  
Indeed, the Fistieus kind is a staff of Milesius; for since Darius, while fighting on Xerxes' side in Persia, having considered friendship to be preserved by Persia, he received from him the gift of myrrh, which Myrcinus had previously called Hedonus. But Megabizus, having turned back toward Phoenicia, Darius [indeed wished not for myrrh to be kept, but rather]... Sed a Sufans he was made to burn Hissiaum.  
Fistieus afterwards, out of love for his homeland, so that in the bank from Persia he might be sent sterems (i.e., perhaps "staves" or "rods") with this art, he excited the compositions; having received fervor, he entirely burned the head of that one,  
wrote, [literally: "literis"] always as: "comatum autens rar fis / Aptrit huncin Miletum ad Ariflagoram,"  
"Quietat gener, confabrinusg, [imul &disteas,"  
"Tondens autem bunces ‘p 565 legens velut chartam: Gracas a Perfisomnes ibe ere faces urber."  

Cap. 14. pag. 59; liv, 13, inter [érendwm.

Let us return to a more hidden manner: for we find that this thread is made in this way. Two small forked supports of equal magnitude and roundness are made, one of which is lengthened toward the friend, the other is kept straight as a rod; when we wish to bind, we revolve the thread above the fork so as to make it fast;  

Mm 2 [p.568]

— mT, nn Si I

548 AucTuaARiu™M ut continuum fir , & ligni nil appareat j filo ac.
commodato per longitudinem baculi liters exa-
bamus, in{cribemus quicquid cordifuerit. Sifur-
culilatiores fuerinr, plures verfuscapient. Siptius
filum aguz immerges » in aque alumen folurom
fic,atramentum non diducetur , fed nitidius chara-
cteres continebit , moxfilum a bacillorevolutum
in glomerulum accommodatur, vel ut occulriffi-
mum fit, interularum & fudariorum ora revolvi-
mus amicoabfenti mittimus, nihil enimin filo cu-
riofiorinterceptor: nifi gquedam difleminata pun-
ctacon{piciet, Amicus eodem bacillo filam re-
volvendo,cura ndoque ut puncta ex fuperioripar-
te veniant , & cohzreantapte, amici,conceptum
facile percipiet. Poflumus& inlibrorum feétioni-
buscharacteres occultare. Cumliber optimé reli-
gacus,& refectus fir, nigrog; colore tinctus, ficum

aperiemus & chartas diducemus, utin obligt fint,

Translation (cleaned and interpreted):

Giovanni Tretzes also mentions this in the same work.  
Indeed, the Fistieus kind is a staff of Milesius; for since Darius, while fighting on Xerxes' side in Persia, having considered friendship to be preserved by Persia, he received from him the gift of myrrh, which Myrcinus had previously called Hedon

We can carry out the extremes on the chart, 8c no- {tre mentis conceptum exarare, ubivero remiflus erit , & chartz {uo loco redierint, nihil in eo feri- ptum videtur, at quilegere yoluerit , in priorem modum chartas diduce t, & litere coharentes biles fient. Eodem modo in mufcariis {cribere porerimas , {cilicet que inrugas contrahuntur ,6¢ moxexplicantur, Idem & luforiisque charcis efhi- cere poterimus : ibienim fatis commodeferibipo- terit,{i rato ordine eas accommodaveris, utaltera alreram confequatur, ubi eas {imul compofueris, & exxquaveris,in cxsuris omnia {cribemus, ubieas poftmodum permisfcueris, & convertes; nil pror- {us priftini {Criptiretinebir, fed folum inordinata puncta curiofius fpectant videbuntur: cum adérie legenda legi-

7 ie ——

[p.569]

AucTuARIUu™M $49 legendi tempus, in ratum ordinem redigendo, pun- ta & linex coibunt, & ordinatam efficient oratio- nem. Poflumus & in alarum pennis columba- rum,fagittarum,aliarumg; albarum avium defcribere,eas furfum Seis fa nam ubi adlocum f{u- um redierint,nil oftendent, fed fi ad priftinum mo- dum diducte,literas perleges,quod non parum uti- licatis afferre poterit lis, qui pro internunciis eis u- tentur. Poflumus etiam in pergameno {cribere, ut licerze non videantur; nam ubiin eo {Cripferis, can- delz lumini,vel igniadmoveto, & sic torum in fe convolvitur,crifpabiturque ,ut priftini veftigii vix guicquam retinganiod {i quis afpexerit prorsus nullius doli capax exsistimabit, atcum legereillud quzfris,locis humidis exponas »velleviter aquis irroes,& explicabuntur mge, evane{cuntque,é& in priftinum ftaum redibit, & impreffi characteres {ine impedimento leguntur. .

Eod.pag.b0.lin.$. addantur fequentia.

[Page 569]

The time for reading, arranging it in order, points and lines join together, and the ordered speech is effective. Posuimus (or perhaps "Posuimus" as a technical term) and in the wings of pigeons, doves, falcons, other birds; to describe albarum (perhaps "albarium," a type of bird or a specific feather?), it is necessary that when they return to their place, nothing often happens, unless the method has been drawn up, letters are read, which could not be easily conveyed otherwise, for those who use them as messengers. Posuimus also in parchment (or "in pergameno") to write, so that the letters do not appear; for where there are ciphers (Cripferis), candles or light, or fire drawn in, and the torus (perhaps a roll or scroll) is wrapped around

But we send letters by swift post and write to them also so that they may not be understood by others, whose disputes are defined, who understand them, and who carry them far away, and whose way is comprehended by the seal, and questioned by storms, nothing can escape because nothing agrees with the first [letter], and the letter is always hidden and never reveals its character or time. The messenger does not die by sea, nor does he perish in the rivers of Sicily, or by any other means; how much this should be considered by the princes. Let them therefore have as little need as possible. Those who wish to announce anything to their friends may do so with almost one rhyme of victory Aeveads at, Sed

Mm 3

[p.570]

45 AUC TWAR TUM.
The invention of letters is partly bad, partly good
They press the letters into the head, which you could read, lest they die from thirst, because they were on the head, then the excretion of hairs becomes visible, and so that the messenger may not know what was written there, for he would labor with his eyes, occasioned by them, to do some remedy, which would fail Liana, and not return evil or guilt: But malice does not seem to be doing this, for someone could decide on the hairs of the suspect and turn fraud around. Moreover, if the messenger were to be sent quickly,

he could do as he could, that with a hair he expects to wait for himself, and when

Translation:

But we send letters by swift post and write to them also so that they may not be understood by others, whose disputes are defined, who understand them, and who carry them far away, and whose way is comprehended by the seal, and questioned by storms, nothing can escape because nothing agrees with the first [letter], and the letter is always hidden and never reveals its character or time. The messenger does not die by sea, nor does he perish in the rivers of Sicily, or by any other means; how much this should be considered by the princes. Let them therefore have as little need as possible. Those who wish to announce anything to their friends may do so with almost one rhyme of victory Aeveads at, Sed

Mm 3

[p.570]

45 AUC TWAR TUM.
The invention of letters is partly bad, partly good
They press the letters into the head, which you could read, lest they die from thirst, because they were on the head, then the excretion of hairs becomes visible, and so that the messenger may not know what was written there, for he would labor with his eyes, occasioned by them, to do some remedy, which would fail Liana, and not return evil or guilt: But malice does not seem to be doing this, for someone could decide on the hairs of the suspect and turn fraud around. Moreover, if the messenger were to be sent quickly,

he could do as he could, that with a hair he expects to wait for himself, and when