We say that the same thing must not be allowed to obscure the light of matter. He gives as an example that we add the uppermost circle of light. —  — doa — ‘ — _ — [p.247]

fives TERTIVS.

OCU XAMTIONB LOE VAN $5

VoevrivAal SASMIAM UAAFS
SSIAEMS)34IO TUR LZTC.
MMAUSTA.LINVILLDGA2TIUH.

Here we set the terminations of the characters, we would be deceived, which agree with regular things, and it will be permitted to see: we will perceive only one thing at a time. For words, which are defined here, rarely ever come into use, and in such a way that they are hardly found again, whether first or third; and therefore the number 7 seems to be required. Those who agree with the confusion, and find it difficult to observe the vowels next, omit this conjunction. Wherefore we consider more certain an argument from micro-filtration being perceived. From these it is seen that two are numbered as twenty, liquid appears, or ten circles; but it is more credible to say: of two letters Y and Z very rarely occurs. In this way this kind {of thing} may be recognized by conjunctions: moreover, the diapason« of such a character will be obtained, first, which in the sixth day is seen as the same, which is fourth from the last Pa post.

Translation:

We say that the same thing must not be allowed to obscure the light of matter. He gives as an example that we add the uppermost circle of light. —  — doa — ‘ — _ — [p.247]

fives TERTIVS.

OCU XAMTIONB LOE VAN $5

VoevrivAal SASMIAM UAAFS
SSIAEMS)34IO TUR LZTC.
MMAUSTA.LINVILLDGA2TIUH.

Here we set the terminations of the characters, we would be deceived, which agree with regular things, and it will be permitted to see: we will perceive only one thing at a time. For words, which are defined here, rarely ever come into use, and in such a way that they are hardly found again, whether first or third; and therefore the number 7 seems to be required. Those who agree with the confusion, and find it difficult to observe the vowels next, omit this conjunction. Wherefore we consider more certain an argument from micro-filtration being perceived. From these it is seen that two are numbered as twenty, liquid appears, or ten circles; but it is more credible to say: of two letters Y and Z very rarely occurs. In this way this kind {of thing} may be recognized by conjunctions: moreover, the diapason« of such a character will be obtained, first, which in the sixth day is seen as the same, which is fourth from the last Pa post.
[p.248]

228 From Ocevir. Lir. Nor. ©

If the same figures of this E, and before-altered Fs are to be found in the fifth place where they exist equally – (¥/utramque ociosamffe. O&avo ee ip jy. _ charaGteres fant aliquot diGioni duodecime © Aprima, &teftie abultima fimiles, juxta qua.° _.. rum primamitalis charaGer eft initio A,propé altéram turfus initio diverfus in hinemodam X, & apud tertiam huiusmodi alius $. Vade colligi poteft eos vanos & fuperfluosse: nifi _ syerbaeadem.non effent, nec idem etymon, fed —difsimilitudine, quz eft cum reéliquis, in calce primz diGjonis nihil poteft affirmari propter caﬁumn inflexionem, qua variatur. Ex voto-lium infuper obfervatione conijcitur in feptima didione; charaGeré quifequitur primum & alium, qui penulcimus eft, quod netitet vo-calis efle videatur: ociosos effe,fiquidem ambo geminatam fequuntur confonantem, quez eft vocalium natura, alioquin penultima figura poteft videri effe liquida , charaéteres funt F & I, In quarta etiam diGione, quod proximeé geminatam conﬁnatem utrinque ﬁgtere apparent, quod vocales non videntur, judicare plane eft, primam, que hec eft B superﬂuam effe, nam altera creditur efle liquida’ Exalijs conie@uriscolligi pareft,hasomnesﬁgurasin ‘totofcripto ociosafles EHAXSFIB. Ijsde_ medio fublatis , {criptum perinde ac fi B _ |. © chata&ereflertantum permutatus — fe interpretabitur,

Carvt

[p.249]

—— ——a | — — —_

_ fic & multz poterunt eifdem charaGeribus ac.

Lizer TEervtivs. 29
C.arvr XUIL | |
yomedd reliquis occultand} dolis huinfmodi [eripti fit occurrendum.

Vi * diximus folent magnati {cribe com- * Lib.acap.é,
y pendiofum f{criptum fic accommodare,

ut perpauce toto {cripto videantur , & verba quemadmodum in una figniﬁcazione , sic in alijseedem ﬁgure diverfis poteftatibus funde,

fbi pariter refpondeant ; huiu{modi dolis fic

---

Translation:

228 From Ocevir. Lir. Nor. ©

If the same figures of this E, and previously altered Fs are to be found in the fifth place where they exist equally – (¥/utramque ociosamffe. O&avo ee ip jy. _ charaGteres fant aliquot diGioni duodecime © Aprima, &teftie abultima fimiles, juxta qua.° _.. rum primamitalis charaGer eft initio A,propé altéram turfus initio diverfus in hinemodam X, & apud tertiam huiusmodi al

It remains to be considered: if few people see the Regula,
the cryptographic characters are so frequently occurring and their yocalium powers are ascribed, which in writing is less difficult than speaking. Moreover, if it will be ambiguous, let the Regula be followed; thus this ambiguity will be avoided, and A, B, Q; PF, DC, & hui modi reliquz, which many, rarely and more often, will observe together with the diGionibus (the zodiac signs), as we have already mentioned, for these two may perform the same function, as will become evident below. It is written thus.

AGAAACNNXAMGAASYNAG

We, if the most subtle characters of the preceding powers are to be assigned, will say BT QVERIMVS VERMES, and also Ai, wS, 2@n,nme, at.yxc, powers are to be assigned; we will say IS Qvr NECaT Vin c1t, & much different speech will arise, which will be commodified.

It may however be recognized (4) Regula: knowledge, where no literary incongruous order, or

[p.250]

< Reiectio:

1. espe
eneris Hulls é ;
ptidepree Quomodo deprehendantur rationes & conie-

fer

h
‘

t. Regula,

dendi. |

:

230 ‘De Ocecvit. Lit. Nor.

vel inordinata verborum compsoficietur. d Multi funt quoqgue doli, ut fuperids recenfuimus, quos omittimus, cum facilius quam fcribi pofsit ab huius disci

plina. Nunc ad glia transeamus. |

Carpvt XV.
(De orbicularifimplici eriptos cr ratio~
nes quibus deprehend: pofit.

Protas rationibus quibus permuratus
charaGer cum reliquis fraudibus,que¢ inde

~poffent emanare, quasi cum tota familia tolle-

retur,proximumeft,uteorum,quain fecundo
volumine traGata{unt, feriem prosequamur,
idem in [cripto, quod orbiculare dicitur, quia ad Rotam.componitur, preftare: quapropter

~quemadmodum fuperioris generis funt for-
mz primum de simplica, unde & reliqua ema-
nant, dicendum videtur. 4 Sed {criptiprimum

Translation:

It remains to be considered: if few people see the Regula,
the cryptographic characters are so frequently occurring and their yocalium powers are ascribed, which in writing is less difficult than speaking. Moreover, if it will be ambiguous, let the Regula be followed; thus this ambiguity will be avoided, and A, B, Q; PF, DC, & hui modi reliquz, which many, rarely and more often, will observe together with the diGionibus (the zodiac signs), as we have already mentioned, for these two may perform the same function, as will become evident below. It is written thus.

AGAAACNNXAMGAASYNAG

We, if the most subtle characters of the preceding powers are to be assigned, will say BT QVERIMVS VERMES, and also Ai, wS, 2@n,nme, at.yxc, powers are to be assigned; we will say IS Qvr NECaT Vin c1t, & much different speech will arise, which will be commodified.

It may however be recognized (4) Regula: knowledge, where no literary incongruous order

Gurz will be able to judge opportunely. 6 First, it will give many similar charms to the invincible and frequent gatherings, both at the beginning, at the end, and in the middle of days, which orthography cannot permit, for neither from geminated (doubled) sounds nor from combining them can one begin, nor can one fall into doubled letters, nor have more than two medial words containing any word with — porrotrium-vocalium initium in verbo — that is found at y1 4. Moreover, to begin, — a, } ; : [p.251] Liser Tearivs. 231 mediate, and will finish the two evenness. - * Otherwise, many gatherings by rote revo- lution, and from this poreftate permuted prove. nire consentaneum est exsistimare. c Huius rei ¢ 2-Regule parirer argumentum dabit plutima modo in uno ver{u figurarii repetitio, modo earundem rarifisimus occur{us, ut vix interda ad tertium velad quartum verfum femel repetantur. d So- * Regen: let * enim.ad conieGturam accedere finalium “**™ characterum numerus,fi plures fint, quam ra- tio permittar, que omnia nufquam if alio {criptigenere folentevenire.

Carpver XVI. Ns Quomodo hoc scripti cens interpretetmr. HYvininet a conicQuris feripti genus al « 2 Methodus fecuri, sequiturchara&erum poteftatem PirPrcranes aucupemur. 4 Porrohoc fcribendi genus, quia fcripta. multo difficilids, quam fuperius videtur eth * Dieheeltate to etiam cautiorem,& fagaciorem interpretem expofcit. Nihil enim hic ex his,que ubi obfer- vari expediebat, poterit adiuvare : fed longé aliz querunturrationes, & multum diverfa eft via interpretandi. Non enim hic prius vocales & confonantes ex repetitiqne proderit discer- nere: nonex confonantium geminatione co- mitantium vocalium notitiam confirmare, vel liquidarum fequelam deprehendere: non ex initijs &finibus, & verborum interpofitioni- bus confonantes & vocales dignofcere: non aw cx — _ [p.252] —— ee an Cie. 7 > i . oh .t

---

Translation:

Gurz will be able to judge opportunely. 6 First, it will give many similar charms to the invincible and frequent gatherings, both at the beginning, at the end, and in the middle of days, which orthography cannot permit, for neither from geminated (doubled) sounds nor from combining them can one begin, nor can one fall into doubled letters, nor have more than two medial words containing any word with — porrotrium-vocalium initium in verbo — that is found at y1 4. Moreover, to begin, — a, } ; : [p.251] Liser Tearivs. 231 mediate, and will finish the two evenness. - * Otherwise, many gatherings by rote revo- lution, and from this poreftate permuted prove. nire consentaneum est exsistimare. c Huius rei ¢ 2-Regule parirer argumentum dabit plutima modo in uno ver{u figurarii repetitio, modo ear

232 Dp. Occvar Lan. (Harn cree
ex frequentia & raritate;nondenique ex aliq
argumento, quod in fuperiori {cripti genere
poterat adiuvare, fingularem licebit hic cha-
racterum notitiam venari: fed alias conie@tu-

ras, aliaque argumenta ad id queri conveniet.
Nam licet (quod non fit)characterum poteftas

femel hoc modo acquiri poflet, nec dum ta= —/
men res fatis esflet.adiumento ineam crebra ©
muneris permutatione, ut vix yel in longa ¢pi-

{tolaedé alias poteftas reftituatur. ¢ Primum

ergo diyerforum charaGerum, qui in epiftola

funt,haberi numerum oportet,utinde quanti-
| dadvrvet:, tatis noftrarum literard noticiaeruatur.d Nam >

‘Ss licethec coniectura poflet fruftrari:quiatamé |

raro aliter provenit,nullo modoett nepliatde
Quemadmodum enim character unus plures
poteftates repre fentatita fit pariter uttoridem
characteres non plures quam pniuslitere po-
teftatem abfoluant; eoque modo pluriym fun-
&ionum exceflus,quz modo upicharaceri tri-
ribuuntur,mox plurium charaéert diverfitate,
uno tantuin fungente munere penstatur. Nec
repugnat, quod fignificantes interdum note
fignificantarum Jiterarum numerum excedant,
vel exadverlo, utpote fi. una figura trium lite-

, rarum, qguz initio funt, poteftatem habeat,

Po quemadmodum feret in DeFicio, & mox

carum qualibet DE F unius, velduorumtan-
tum characterum figuris fignarecur, & aliter,

ut fi unuscharacter duas habeat poteftates, ut
effet in primis literis verbi Deseo, quarum
qualibet. tribus charaGeribus. notaretur,
fiquis

-

et Regula

[p.253]

Lisger TEeERnTrvs. (233

- fiquidéin alterutris numerus diminutus, alias
in alijs charaéteribus adimpletur. Vande eft
colligere, fic fer¢ femper ¢venire,’ vt mutua
penfatione noftrarum Jiterarum numerus cha- :
racterum quantitati respondeat. ¢Adhoc ita-
** Regula.”
que {cripti genus, vaus primum modns afterri
poteft, cuius tamen nixu, tota interpretandi

---

Translation:

232 Dp. Occvar Lan. (Harn cree
from frequency and rarity; and also from some argument, which in the preceding [type of] cipher might be helpful, it will be permitted here to seek knowledge of individual characters: besides other conjectures, which will suit this matter.
For it is permitted (though it does not happen) to acquire the power of characters in this way, neither while things are happening, nor by means of frequent permutation of gifts, so that even a little [something] in long duration might be restored. First,

therefore, two kinds of characters, which occur in letters,
must have a number, so that, according to how many there are

ratio is supported. If therefore the parts that are equal in fire at the beginning are considered, which especially should be noted as peculiar, if there are more of them here, they will be marked, or their medians will coincide: or they will precede and begin the next ones; certainly the third or fourth place, otherwise, unless different, or transferred into other terms, repeated; for it is more difficult to conjecture the verb, under which the entire art of interpretation is bound: from which if error occurs at the beginning, throughout the progress of the error it becomes necessary, and scarcely can be extricated by any means: which word is suitable here to ask about; in which, using much caution and greater care, it is fitting that a verb be sought, as much as possible, so that if an error occurs at the beginning, a greater indeliberateness may result. Such criteria, if close to the order of the alphabet or immediately preceding letters, are added. "It will be similar in pairs, as if similar ones distinguish, the number of intermediate letters is considered, and words are sought, in which the letter stands, which are placed at equal intervals in the alphabet, and similar ones proceed in cipher: Eratibi medius numbers were called, which dissimilar ones see. Many letters agree with this, the greater utility.
P 5 tatem
[p.254]
234 De Occvtr. Lir. Nor.
tatem importabunt. Nam prima fronte plu-
b4.Regale. riumindefimilid poterit haberi notitia. b Ve-
rum eiusmodi si plura fuerint, poterit excon-
secuentibus judicati, quod exillis poris fimum
" {criptum fit, hoc characterum ordo & nume-
‘Exempla ruf praetabunt. iSed ve res clarior fiat, de fin-
kx-Fanisea sulisfubjiciamexempla. & Primum itaq; plu-"

Reconstruction: "ratio is supported." (The OCR seems to have errors like "fubstentatur" → "supportatur", "Initioigitur partes que-/Ca# feu pare." → "initio igitur partes quae / cuius feu pare" maybe "if therefore the parts which are equal in fire at the beginning". "ri & feligioportet,quas peculiarialiquare ma- 4 gis conyeniat notari, vtpote si vel plures ibi 2." → "reguli et facilisoportet, quas peculiaria liquare ma- gistere coniungat notari, ut pote si vel plures ibi" maybe "and it is easy that the particular things which are to be distinguished, if there are more of them here". "charaGeres jn ipfis medijs concurrant :vel ter- 3- minentpracedentia, & inchoent proxima:vel certé tertio, aut quarto loco, gut aliter, modo | non nimit dis- tent, aut in alias dictiones tran- sefant,repetantur; nam fic difficilior efletverbi conjecura, fuper quo tota interpretandi mo- les innitetur: vnde fi initio peccatur, in toto etiam progreffu errorem fequi necefle eft, ve vix vllopactoab coindeticeat extricari: ¢ Qua-s**o™." → "characters in their medians coincide; or they precede and begin the next ones; certainly the third or fourth place, otherwise, unless different, or transferred into other terms, repeated; for it is more difficult to conjecture the verb, under which the

"the same kind will appear at the beginning, it will be found in three letters of De Fr1c10 and STvDty Ms; for these two letters are placed side by side in alphabetical order. It is not between them that a difference exists, nor does the order of the same kind need to be considered; rather, within the given days, VIONOPHRIVS and Fastvs, finally DAMNO and Pastv, will indeed be found in day L&N, and conversely Avipvs will also appear there, since first the letter N is distinguished, and then N followed by O according to the order of the elements; how many days are distinguished, and how many letters intersect A and D, how many days intersect in L&N oO, one E is placed in the middle, and then in day L&N. AVIDvVS, two letters V and I, among these also coincide. From the same kind, which precedes words, and next to figures, an example will be in the word Ars Tva, where four letters, the first being A, follow one another in alphabetical order; in such a cipher, those characters are noted. It must first be established for the purpose of interpreting the whole that the total amount of interpretation is constrained by this."

Partis feu
calus.

«4. Partis fou
9s) |

[p.255]

The same kind will appear at the beginning; it will be found in three letters of De Fr1c10 and STvDty Ms; for these two letters are placed side by side in alphabetical order. There is no difference between them, nor does the order of the same kind need to be considered; rather, within the given days VIONOPHRIVS and Fastvs, finally DAMNO and Pastv, will indeed occur in day L&N, and conversely Avipvs will also appear there, since first the letter N is distinguished, and then N followed by O according to the order of the elements; how many days are distinguished, and how many letters intersect A and D, how many days intersect in L&N oO, one E is placed in the middle, and then in day L&N. AVIDvVS, two letters V and I, among these also coincide. From the same kind, which precedes words, and next to figures, an example will be in the word Ars Tva, where four letters, the first being A, follow one another in alphabetical order; in such a cipher those characters are noted. It must first be established for the purpose of interpreting the whole that the total amount of interpretation is constrained by this.

Partis feu
calus.

«4. Partis fou
9s) |

[p.255]

"Liner Terrivs. 235 - therefore, at the beginning, five simultaneously begin to differ from each other with distinct letters, and knowing these, they say that one or another letter will be noted above: so many times MOx6. Rule; these characters will be observed by the same, because the superior knowledge of the alphabet is noticed; as each letter is taken from the beginning, it is extended, so that if any similar letter is found, each letter in it can be assigned. But then the progress of the alphabet proceeds until it reaches a new element, and thus the first character will be made from the first beginning: and the same method applies to things one by one at the beginning or in words; they will be noted in order. But (1) Caution. The diminished use of letter numbers will be, the ratio of letters being more credible than those omitted, and conversely, those which we can more easily omit, the more frequent and rarer ones are reflected. In this way, however, we give X more than Z; we leave Z to be taken less. The same will soon be done with the entire cipher; read carefully and diligently in the known *7-Regale; to others it will proceed on the same day with the same figures; and (2) using similar letters, it can be assigned in this way. (That from behind other rules, similar figures remain, when the last of that order is reached, differing letters will be added, the progress will continue, and from there the first characters * e2: . iter"

[p.256]

436 De Occvcir. Lit. Nor,

* letter is converted by this method, until

Dp. Regula.

® Io, Regula.

iI, Regula,

a new similar letter will come, so that the cipher will be seen, except for the first words,

which may have complete knowledge, otherwise

one or another character of unknown type, which through inflection comes, none of the characters can be placed above. This same method, however, is applied to this, co-"

Let me carefully analyze and translate this Latin passage while preserving technical terms and making scholarly reconstructions where OCR has garbled text.

First, I need to understand what this is about. It appears to be a cryptographic or cipher-related text from Giambattista della Porta's "De Occultis Literarum Notis" (1592), discussing methods for assigning letters in a cipher system.

Let me go through the passage systematically:

"; '\" Liner Terrivs. 235 -"

This seems to be referencing page 235 of some work, possibly "Lini Terrivs" which might be a title or reference. The semicolon and quotation mark suggest this is part of a larger text.

"tur, nInitio itaque, five que afsimulancur fi-*5-*<s0l* gure fimul concurrant, five intermifsis {paci}s dis tent, cognitoexhis, que di@afunt, vno, aut alrero verbo fua fingulis characéteribus litera~ rum poteftas fupernotabitur :0& quoties MOx ¢6.Regula,"

This is quite garbled. Let me try to reconstruct:

"it therefore begins at the beginning, five simultaneously begin to differ from each other with distinct letters, and knowing these, they say that one or another letter will be noted above: so many times MOx6. Rule;"

I think "five simultaneously begin to differ" refers to a cipher system where five elements (possibly letters) are assigned at once. The "MOx6" might be "M O x 6" which could mean "5 times 6" or something similar, but I'm not

It is almost to be carried out in order, so that it may be made easier to interpret by stripping away the progress.

Therefore, a word will be chosen, in which many characters are found, and hidden notes, and the connection of letters, and the remaining judgments are given as gifts, so that the word itself, which is more verifiable than anything else, is confirmed, so that it may proceed in writing, namely so that it is always led by our familiar code of literary letters, that is, guided safely, and this must be done until what is closed is returned. To these also this reason adds, because rarely does it happen in a cipher, especially with the double diffusion, that the same word is repeated, so that it may be observed whether any such thing of this kind has been recognized, either wholly or partially. This first (perhaps) could be obtained from similar conjectures. Perhaps it is those very simple intervals and the same interval, soon regarding other things.

Commonition next confirms. But I do not wish to preempt the truth, — these, which are said, do not pertain to another, but simply

#2 Cémonitiocem Rote composition belongs to. z Around

of this kind of cipher it must be carefully attended to, and not little accurately elaborated.

[p.257]

Lieer Terrivs. 237
to be done. For if the progress of the calculation were to deviate, necessary delay would follow from the work, completely as the labyrinthine thread is entered by two threads, which turns back where it was made to enter, and goes forward as much more quickly, so that it is easier to escape than to explain all the winding ways.

RS

Carpvr XVII
On the example of a simple circular (cipher) interpretation,

I declare this, which of this kind of ciphered letters are found, unknown, and similarly as the ordinary genus is predicted, I will present an example. Such a thing happens thus

BOE + ake XX OX KH
tb bt BHKK sO00% 8038
DFHKEO MIR RE KOH
Dose MEIGS x
we obscure in epistle characters we know, and also we conjecture by number the letters of our alphabet or

rr a L2g———e se LULL Lh eer mh rh rtt—COCe te
A

Translation:

It is almost to be carried out in order, so that it may be made easier to interpret by stripping away the progress.

Therefore, a word will be chosen, in which many characters are found, and hidden notes, and the connection of letters, and the remaining judgments are given as gifts, so that the word itself, which is more verifiable than anything else, is confirmed, so that it may proceed in writing, namely so that it is always led by our familiar code of literary letters, that is, guided safely, and this must be done until what is closed is returned. To these also this reason adds, because rarely does it happen in a cipher, especially with the double diffusion, that the same word is repeated, so that it may be observed whether any such thing of this kind has been recognized, either wholly or partially. This first (perhaps) could be obtained from similar conjectures. Perhaps it is those very simple intervals and the same interval, soon regarding other things.

Commonition next confirms. But I do not wish to preempt the truth, — these, which are said, do not pertain to another, but simply

#2 Cémonitiocem Rote composition belongs to. z Around

of this kind of cipher it must be carefully attended to, and not little accurately elaborated.

[p.257]

Lieer Terrivs. 237
to be done. For if the progress of the calculation

Either X or Z is written in cipher. Therefore, what certain word among others more obscurely occurs in two or three first letters almost always indicates: — eure, and soon a fourth with two inserted {pacijs seems to be chosen. ‘If by conjectures the word to be sought must be, which to these characters, by the similarity of three letters, is sometimes found at the beginning, and soon another, [the] third placed from the yttrium place, and.

commodare if sit, nothing else will be seen for them than DE FICIYNT, DEFICIANT, Vel DEFICIENT, & STVDEBVNT, vel STYDEBANT, to decipher by number of characters not being able to struggle.

te. From which the other true is found,

from its consequences first word {cryptic _
agnofcimus. Inalteroenim non fequitur lite-
rarumnexus. Quod vt paldm fiat, non grava-
borindicare. Nam fia quartailliuslitera D, re-
trogtadusliterari ordo adaliam fimilem pro-
ducatur, que eftin fine verbi Z, vel X poteftas
in illam cadet.Sed ex prima élatiis patet error,

quam vt demontftrari opus fit:Siquidé. nulla di-

ctioeft,que ealiteraterminetur. Dealtera vero
dici poteft etiamnitin calculiserratiefle. Nam
vetba, quzin eam literi cadant, rarifsima furit,
& ea proinde parcifsimivfus: Vnde credibilius
eftalcerum verbum effe quain illud,cuiusindi-—
cio du@iin rem rarisfisam incidimus. Super-
eft in co verbo tertius chara@er ab vitimo, V
ne fit an A poteftatem habeat videre, quod ex —
figura licet agnofcere, Siquidem du@us ad

fimiles proximas, que initio fexte diionis
funr,

[p.259]

--- 

Translation:

Either X or Z is written in cipher. Therefore, what certain word among others more obscurely occurs in two or three first letters almost always indicates: — eure, and soon a fourth with two inserted {pacijs seems to be chosen. ‘If by conjectures the word to be sought must be, which to these characters, by the similarity of three letters, is sometimes found at the beginning, and soon another, [the] third placed from the yttrium place, and.

commodare if sit, nothing else will be seen for them than DE FICIYNT, DEFICIANT, Vel DEFICIENT, & STVDEBVNT, vel STYDEBANT, to decipher by number of characters not being able to struggle.

te. From which the other true is found,

from its consequences first word {cryptic _
agnofcimus. Inalteroenim non fequitur lite-
rarumnexus. Quod vt paldm fiat, non grava-
borindicare. Nam fia quartailliuslitera D, re-
trogtadusliterari ordo adaliam fimilem pro-
ducatur, que eftin fine verbi Z, vel X poteftas
in illam cadet.Sed ex prima élatiis patet error,

quam vt demontftrari opus fit:Siquidé. nulla di-

ctioeft,que ealiteraterminetur. Dealtera vero
dici poteft etiamnitin calculiserratiefle. Nam
vetba

Liter TERTIVS 239  
fant, illegitimum literarum nexum, ut L, M, Ns  
- fibiftatim fuccedant, ut verbum seu non pot  
fer. Idem dicendum erit, si ea litera, de qua  
ambigitur E fucurafit, ve DeFlc1EeNT ver  
bum fit, Siquidem PQR fefe ftatim fequun-  
rur, quodfyllabarum nexus non patitur. Ex  
his ergo conjecturis licet citra controverfiam  
coucluderes, non aliud ibi verbum notari, quam Desicivnt, Cognitis in hunc modum  
- pluribus! charaGerum formis,.reftabic quafi:  
jactis fundamentis omnem interpretandradi- gut quoad pri-  
ficationem fuperstruere: Hic igitur modts zak pedulciane  
fervabitur. Initio quia primis figuris hujus-  
soem modi per totum fcriprum alizduz fimiles oc-  
totulam non currunt, quarum altera fecunda prime di@io- E> hane loca  
nis eft, altera prima penultima, vnde diverfo me non capere  
' tramite ad eas procedendum eft; ad vnam**  
ipfius perduci primum deindead alteram pro.  
gredi oportet, ut ante ad dextram, moxad fi-  
nisftram tam {cripti; quam literarum ordinem  
fie&amus. Ab eaitaque figura, que quartaeft  
ab vitima cogniti yerbi, literarum alphabeti  
ordoad fimilem ducatur,que eftin penultima,  
ab ealiterafumpto initio, quz fueritalsignata,  
M poteftasin eam cadet, quareilla fupernota-  
bitur. Hoc cognito charaereeodem fa&o re-  
ditu, vndeante digrefsio facta eft, & itera faa:  
initio ab asfignata literz poteftate,quiaad lite.  
ram cOverfus alphabeti ordo perduatus, illam  
O habere poteftatem indicat, ea fupernotabi-  
tur. Succedithis proxime chara@er, cui! pote-  
{tas tradita eft, ad primam fibi fimilem, quz

[p.260]

Ya

240 «= DE OccvtrT. Lit. Nor.!
diGionem, que precedit proximam terminat, .  
- duéto.filoalphabeti ordine:retrogrado, cuius  
*xiux. |. *E poteftatem indicabit & pari rationeé fer-  
i vata, moxalia huic fimilis que novifsime pri-

Translation:

Liter TERTIVS 239  
fant, illegitimum literarum nexum, ut L, M, Ns  
- fibiftatim fuccedant, ut verbum seu non pot  
fer. Idem dicendum erit, si ea litera, de qua  
ambigitur E fucurafit, ve DeFlc1EeNT ver  
bum fit, Siquidem PQR fefe ftatim fequun

madicionisadheret; V fibi potéeftatem vindi-
cabit. Eundem ordinem fequntij quiatt cha-
racterem diGionis .quz decima’¢ollocatur;
quodilli afsimilacur,icui C poteftasafsignatur
R, &imox quattuim penultimz leffe deprehen-
dimiis. Eadem tatione tres figuras,‘que@ fextz
_... _ diG@ioilis initio ponuntur Hit, & Guz hone
*Nono'di- ."Iotowltime {unt D &,& qua tertidab vitimo
cueniau ne; tOridem R & T,& que-demum penultimiordi-
nisnovifsimacf, Efungi munere videbimns;
Que figura quia fuperius,; & multarum pro-
mide literarum notitiain parit, eam feecundam
*Modun. €XMerito nuncupamis. In eum medium *per
benultimam eius verbisfiguram, fimilium,que
{equunturt,poterit officiumiagnofei,veprimam
quintz diGionisa poftrema T; moxalia quarts
t# E vim habere cognofcemts. Vitina quid
hullius obis hotitiam detegit; quod illi fimis
lis nulla fit, 4 nobis fterilis appellattir. Fxplo-
rata in hunc.modum multarum litérarum
poteftate aliarum diGionum cogniti aliquot
characteres con{picientur, alidrum vero non.
Poft hec igitur priorem ordiné zmulabimur,.
vieatn dicionem eligamus, cui plures nobis
figure con{picue factz fint, vt inde-faciliorem’
verbiconjeGuram aflequamur; eiufmodi ver-
bum erit, quod fexto loco ponitur, cuius tril;
gui initio funtcharaéerum, notitiahabetur: ff
| .. Cconjecurant

[p.261]

Lreek Tertivs 24;

conie&uratn fequimur; hullum aliud verbum
adeiusliteras;\quam vni, cuius erymon ab hi-

laritate provenit, fervato literarum numero
accoiimodati pofle conf{picietur. Verum ca-

fuum inflexio circa pehultimam literamam-
bignitacein faciet, que ex quingue vocalibus
potifsimtin debet conferi, quod excohfequé-.
tibus licebit depfehendi: * Primo A noii effe * Deprehédere
4rguitmis, Guod in duas, que quartam ibi di-

Gioneti abfoluunt,LM poteftas caderet,quo

eft abfurdimi. Idem de E & O dicitur, fiqui-
dem inde eafdeth PQ, vel BC éffe fequeretut.

Ex his fuperefflet tantuin de V, & I dubitare.

Quia fatis roti videtur conftare : Siquidé quod

[page 261]

Greek Tertius 24;

we will combine; any other word
closer to letters\ than one, whose root comes from heat,
will be found in the number of letters arranged together. The true
flexion

It might have arisen, it could be able, or the word "flē Hs; ¥el Tv." But this will not obstruct anything to which a man of sound mind is accustomed, nor his figure in relation to religion, whose ambiguity produces less confusion in the rest. Beginning and also the perfect step, new * figure, which drags hindrance from within itself, & A "Nene retains power, it will be, from it I take as a prelude colligatio, superstitiousness generated, to him similar, which is placed by the arrangement of the word's position E vim ha- bee; soon two neighboring divisions 1& M, & of the same kind vitimz V. The same practice will also apply and another figure, to which R is assigned. For its benefit: first of the tenth order, fourth O, then the nearest vitimam T, in the mode of order preceding the vitimam M, & {and of the third & fourth OP, & the first vitimam, & that which is third from it I we know to have power. It returns Q so much

[p.262]

* Reftant,

242 De Occvtr. Lit. Nor:

Translation:

It might have arisen, it could be able, or the word "flē Hs; ¥el Tv." But this will not obstruct anything to which a man of sound mind is accustomed, nor his figure in relation to religion, whose ambiguity produces less confusion in the rest. Beginning and also the perfect step, new * figure, which drags hindrance from within itself, & A "Nene retains power, it will be, from it I take as a prelude colligatio, superstitiousness generated, to him similar, which is placed by the arrangement of the word's position E vim ha- bee; soon two neighboring divisions 1& M, & of the same kind vitimz V. The same practice will also apply and another figure, to which R is assigned. For its benefit: first of the tenth order, fourth O, then the nearest vitimam T, in the mode of order preceding the vitimam M, & {and of the third & fourth OP, & the first vitimam, & that which is third from it I we know to have power. It returns Q so much

[p.262]

* Reftant,

242 De Occvtr. Lit. Nor:

We have only the victim, for we have left behind both ambiguerlinquimus. Therefore its third indication of the fifth day of June, which is taken from the victim M and the first [victim], finally the third indication of the fifth day in reverse order, having been discovered by us through the aid of these two days: thus we have knowledge of the nature of charms through the benefit of these two days; next comes this word to another: that which is complete in itself: one letter only, which can be divided into a middle part, so that it may be concealed: it will be revealed by conjecture. For not otherwise than A could restore the whole word, so that it becomes integral. We have discovered the nature of four kinds of charms through new knowledge of charag@eris: first indeed the newest O, soon two, which together constitute § & T, and the fifth indication of the first day E we comprehend as having. Thus it seems to us from digression that next to us is the sixth [day?], which becomes the third, whose integral nature requires only one letter, which is most recent; none other than O can fill it, so that it becomes a word, by this same benefit we collect only one letter of knowledge, which is abundantly placed at the beginning of the word. *In addition, two dictiones [terms?], in which each letter must be understood as a whole, are recognized. But since these, which are days, appear to us to be what remains to be interpreted and imposed, and since ambiguity of three characters should be left aside, it seems that the verb will take, whose indication may have their knowledge; that will be, which

fifth:

EE ———— ——

[p.263]

Lirsper TerTtIvsS. 243

Translation:

We have only the victim, for we have left behind both ambiguerlinquimus. Therefore its third indication of the fifth day of June, which is taken from the victim M and the first [victim], finally the third indication of the fifth day in reverse order, having been discovered by us through the aid of these two days: thus we have knowledge of the nature of charms through the benefit of these two days; next comes this word to another: that which is complete in itself: one letter only, which can be divided into a middle part, so that it may be concealed: it will be revealed by conjecture. For not otherwise than A could restore the whole word, so that it becomes integral. We have discovered the nature of four kinds of charms through new knowledge of charag@eris: first indeed the newest O, soon two, which together constitute § & T, and the fifth indication of the first day E we comprehend as having. Thus it seems to us from digression that next to us is the sixth [day?], which becomes the third, whose integral nature requires only one letter, which is most recent; none other than O can fill it, so that it becomes a word, by this same benefit we collect only one letter of knowledge, which is abundantly placed at the beginning of the word. *In addition, two dictiones [terms?], in which each letter must be understood as a whole, are recognized. But since these, which are days, appear to us to be what remains to be interpreted and imposed, and since ambiguity of three characters should be left aside, it seems that the verb will take, whose indication may have their knowledge; that will be, which

fifth:

EE ———— ——

[p.263]

Lirsper TerTtIvsS. 243

In the fifth place it is placed, for from an understood word it will easily be recognized, whether they are to be judged or not. For Venus either can speak, or if so, let this pronoun refer to the preceding verb, and Ty to that, which can be done in the fourth place. And also the letter, which was made into a verb, because no other power can be attributed to it (as Enim adverbium fit: ambiguity is removed from its letter, which is placed fifth in the sexdodecahedron, and two divisions which absolve it, so that here Hira- risnomen is made, this truly is pronoun Ty. In this way the greater part of the cryptic matter is explained, restores the end, for the same mode will be observed: indeed it is certain (picua) that it can be understood in either way,

GCarpvTt XVIII.

Continuation of longer circular [cryptic] parts will be seen.

It is equal to what concerns this kind of continuous ciphers, how the parts were made, let us say nothing. For coje@urastradere qui- 41: Rule: when it is recognized that things are not opposed, for fate indeed!

ipfe oculora fenfus, vt bfuperius in simili for 4751, » cap. 6.
mascriptadi&um eft, potcrit indubitatum ar- & hoc li,ca. 9.
argumentum dare. In hoc, ad ea que ibi dia
sunt,le@oremremittere fatis comodum videri

p offet, nifi proprianonnulla, que ad hanc rem

{pectant, pretermittere non videretur opor-

tunum,. ¢Hoc itaque primum admonebo, vt «2. Regula,

Q 2 quemad.

[p.264]

:

Cautio,

© te Regula.

24a De Occvir. Lir. Nor:

quemadmodum ibi aGum eft, pari ordined
procedatur, nempe vt fimiles inter fe partes.
obferventur: habira tamen analogiz ratione
in permutatis chata&eribus, quibus idemvi-
debitur fignificari. eHoc etiam fimilium figu-

. rarum, que fefe ftatim fequantur obser- vation

preftabic: prefertim fiplures duabus ill sint,
fiquidem discretio aut ante primam cadet, aut
poftillam, aut poft altefam, aut poft tertiam,

2. parcifsimé aliter evenit. Idem etiam, si non

plures duabus illz fint, dici potetit. Vinde at-
guctur, aut inter eas partium effe difctimen,
aut in prima vérbiinitiumefle, autilludinno-

Translation:

In the fifth place it is set, for from an understood word it will easily be recognized whether they are to be judged or not. For Venus either can speak, or if so, let this pronoun refer to the preceding verb, and Ty to that which can be done in the fourth place. And also the letter, which was made into a verb, because no other power can be attributed to it (as Enim adverbum fit: ambiguity is removed from its letter, which is placed fifth in the sexdodecahedron, and two divisions which absolve it, so that here Hira- risnomen is made, this truly is pronoun Ty. In this way the greater part of the cryptic matter is explained, restores

3, most foolishly fall. More silver than three times,  
the middle discretion of words must be made  
necessary. Soon the preceding first-

Translation:

3, most foolishly fall. More silver than three times,  
the middle discretion of words must be made  
necessary. Soon the preceding first-